Natural Capital and
Sustainable Development
ROBERT COSTANZA
Director, Maryland International Institute for Ecological Economics
Center for Environmental and Estuarine Studies

University of Maryland

Box 38, Solomons, MD 20688, US.A.

HERMAN

E. DALY*

Environment Department
The World Bank

1818 H. Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433, USA.

Abstract: A minimum necessary condition for sustainabil-

Resumen:

ity is the maintenance of the total natural capital stock at or
above the current level. While a lower stock of natural cap-

tenido es el mantenimiento del stock del capital natural
total al presente nivel o por encima del mismo. Si bien un

ital may be sustainable, society can allow no furtber decline

stock de capital natural menor podria ser sostenible, la sociedad no permite mayores declinaciones en el mismo debido a la gran incertidumbre y a las consecuencias lamentables que podria tener el adivinar erradamente. Esta regla
“de constancia del capital natural total” puede por lo tanto

in natural capital given the large uncertainty and the dire
consequences of guessing wrong. This “constancy of total
natural capital” rule can thus be seen as a prudent mini-

mum condition for assuring sustainability, to be relaxed

only when solid evidence can be offered that it is safe to
do so.
We discuss metbodological issues concerning the degree of
substitutability of manufactured for natural capital, quantifying ecosystem services and natural capital, and the role
of the discount rate in valuing natural capital. We differentiate the concepts of growth (material increase in size) and

development (improvement in organization without size
change). Given these definitions, growth cannot be sustainable indefinitely on a finite planet. Development may be
sustainable, but even this aspect of change may bave some
limits. One problem is that current measures of economic
well-being at the macro level (i.e, the Gross National Prod-

uct) measure mainly growth, or at best conflate growth and
development. This urgently requires revision.
Finally, we suggest some principles of sustainable development and describe why maintaining natural capital
stocks is a prudent and achievable policy for insuring sustainable development, There is disagreement between tech-

nological optimists (who see technical progress as eliminat-

Una condicién minima para el crecimiento sos-

ser considerada una prudente condicion minima para ase-

gurar sostenibilidad econémica, que solo podria ser relajada
cuando se den slidas evidencias en contrario.
Discutimos temas metodologicos que conciernen el grado
de sostenibilidad econémica de capital manufacturado por
capital natural, cuantificacion de los servicios del ecosistema y capital natural, y el rol de la tasa de descuento en
la valoracion de capital natural Diferenciamos entre los
conceptos de crecimiento (crecimiento material en tamasnio)

y desarrollo (mejoramiento en la organizacién sin cambio
en tamano). Dadas estas definiciones, el crecimiento no
puede ser mantenido indefinidamente en un planeta limitado. El desarrollo puede ser sostenido, pero incluso este aspecto del cambio puede tener limites. Uno de los problemas
es que las variables corrientemente usadas para medir el
bienestar

a nivel global

(es decir el Producto

Nacional

Bruto) miden principalmente crecimiento, 0 como mdximo
relacionan entre si crecimiento y desarrollo.

Esto requiere

una revision en forma urgente.

Finalmente, pfoponemos algunos principios de desarrolio

Paper submitted December 7, 1990; revised manuscript acceptedAugust5, 1991
* The views presented here are those of the autbor and should in no
way be attributed to the World Bank.
37

Conservation Biology
Volume 6, No. 1, March 1992

38

Natural Capital

ing all resource constraints to growth and development) and

technological skeptics (who do not see as much scope for this
approach and fear irreversible use of resources and damage
to natural capital). By maintaining natural capital stocks
(preferably by using a natural capital depletion tax), we can
satisfy both the skeptics (since resources will be conserved
Jor future generations) and the optimists (since this will
raise the price of natural capital depletion and more rapidly
induce the technical change they predict).

Costanza
& Daly

sostenible y describimos porque el mantenimiento del stock
de capital natural representa una politica prudentey posible

para asegurar un desarrollo sostenido. Existe un desacuerdo

entre optimistas tecnoldgicos (que ven el progreso tecnolégico como eliminando todos los limites, en cuanto a re-

cursos, sobre el crecimiento y desarrollo) y escépticos tecno-

I6gicos (que no ven espacio suficiente para esta posibilidad

¥ temen un uso irreversible de los recursosy un darno al
capital natural). Manteniendo los stocks de capital natural

(preferentemente usando un impuesto al uso exbaustivo de
capital natural) podemos satisfacer tanto a los escépticos
(dado que la recursos van a ser conservados para genera-

ciones futuras) como a los optimistas (dado que esto va a

incrementar el precio del uso exbaustivo de capital natural

e inducird mds rapidamente los cambios técnicos que ellos

predicen,).

What Is Natural Capital?
Since “capital” is traditionally defined as produced
(manufactured) means of production, the term “natural
capital” needs explanation. It is based on a more functional definition of capital as “a stock that yields a flow
of valuable goods or services into the future.” What is
functionally important is the relation of a stock yielding
a flow—whether the stock is manufactured or natural is
in this view a distinction between kinds of capital and
not a defining characteristic of capital itself. For example, a stock or population of trees or fish provides a flow
or annual yield of new trees or fish, a flow that can be

sustainable year after year. The sustainable flow is “natural income”; the stock that yields the sustainable flow

is “natural capital.” Natural capital may also provide services such as recycling waste materials, or water catchment and erosion control, which are also counted as
natural income. Since the flow of services from ecosystems requires that they function as whole systems, the
structure and diversity of the system is an important
component in natural capital.
We also need to differentiate between natural capital
and income and natural resources. There are at least two
possibilities here: (1) natural capital and natural income
are simply the stock and flow components, respectively,
of natural resources, and (2) natural capital and natural
income are aggregates of natural resources in their separate stock and flow dimensions, and forming these aggregates requires some relative valuation of the different
types of natural resource stocks and flows. Capital and
income, in this view, have distinct evaluative connotations relative to the more physical connotations of the
term “resources.” We prefer the latter definition because it emphasizes the aggregate nature of terms such
as “capital” and “income” while acknowledging that this
aggregation is both a strength and a weakness.

Conservation Biology
Volume 6, No. 1, March 1992

‘We can differentiate two broad types of natural capital: (1) renewable or active natural capital, and (2)
nonrenewable or inactive natural capital. Renewable
natural capital is active and self-maintaining using solar
energy. Ecosystems are renewable natural capital. They
can be harvested to yield ecosystem goods (such as
‘wood) but they also yield a flow of ecosystem services
‘when left in place (such as erosion control and recreation). Nonrenewable natural capital is more passive.
Fossil fuel and mineral deposits are the best examples.
They generally yield no services until extracted. Renewable natural capital is analogous to machines and is subject to entropic depreciation; nonrenewable natural
capital is analogous to inventories and is subject to liguidation (El Serafy 1989).
In addition, we can differentiate two broad types of
human-made capital. One is the factories, buildings,
tools, and other physical artifacts usually associated with
the term “capital.” A second is the stock of education,
skills, culture, and knowledge stored in human beings
themselves. The latter type is usually referred to as “human capital” while the former we will call simply “manufactured capital.” Thus we have three broad types of
capital: natural, human, and manufactured, corresponding roughly to the traditional economic factors of production of land, labor, and capital. In addition, we have
the important distinction between renewable and nonrenewable natural capital, and for some purposes we
can lump both human and manufactured capital together as “human-made capital.”
Figure 1 elaborates these concepts and their interconnections. Manufactured capital (MC), human capital
(HC), and renewable natural capital (RNC) decay at
significant rates by the second law of thermodynamics
and must constantly be maintained. Nonrenewable natural capital (NNC) also decays, but the rate is so slow
relative to MC and RNC that this can be ignored. NNC

Natural Capital

Costanza
& Daly

39

Nonrenewable
Natural Capital
(NNC)

Economic Goods
& Services

Solar Energy

Qmﬁ .
Maintenance

Population

B
Capital Stock

5

.~

‘Good or Service Flow

Functional

Dependence

O
Auxiliary o

EXogenous
Variable

Legend
Figure 1. Types of natural and human-made capital stocks, good and service flows, and their interdependence.
can be viewed as a long-term inventory that will sit
quietly until extracted and used, but once it is used it is
gone. RNC produces both ecosystem goods (portions of
the RNC itself) and ecosystem services, and renews itself using its own capital stock and solar energy. Excessive harvest of ecosystem goods can reduce RNC'’s ability to produce services and to maintain itself. MC, RNC,
ecosystem services, and NNC interact with HC and eco-

key idea in sustainability of development. It is important

for operational purposes to define sustainable development in terms of constant or nondeclining TNC, rather

than in terms of nondeclining utility (e.g., Pezzey 1989).

counted as income. This should at least be true for RNC.

‘While there are admittedly problems in measuring TNC,
utility is beyond all hope of measurement. Aggregated,
discounted future utility is what is really needed to operationalize the utility-based definition of sustainability,
and that is even more of a will-o’-the-wisp. Also, an important motivation behind the sustainable development
discussion is that of a just bequest to future generations.
Utility cannot be bequeathed, but natural capital can be.
Whether future generations use the natural capital we
bequeath to them in ways that lead to happiness or to
misery is beyond our control. We are not responsible
for their happiness or utility—only for conserving for
them the natural capital that can provide happiness if
used wisely.
In the past, only manufactured stocks were considered as capital because natural capital was superabun-

Since NNC must run down with use, a logical way to
maintain constant income is to maintain as constant the
total natural capital (TNC = RNC + NNC), which implies some reinvestment of the NNC consumed into
RNC (as has been suggested by El Serafy [1989] for
national income accounting [more on this later]).
Hence constancy of total natural capital (TNC) is the

scale relative to natural processes to interfere with the
free provision of natural goods and services. Expansion
of manufactured and human capital entailed no opportunity cost in terms of the sacrifice of services of natural
capital. Manufactured and human capital were the limiting factors in economic development. Natural capital

nomic demand to determine the level of “economic”
(marketed) goods and services production. The form of
this interaction is very important to sustainability, and it
is not well understood (more on this later). Total income in the context of Figure 1 is a combination of
traditional marketed economic goods and services, and
nonmarketed ecosystem goods and services.
The concept of sustainability is implicit in the definition of income (following Hicks), so natural income
must be sustainable; that is, any consumption that requires the running down of natural capital cannot be

dant in that mankind’s activities operated at too small a

Conservation Biology
Volume 6, No. 1, March 1992

40

Natural Capital

Costanza & Daly

1800

was a free good. We are now entering an era, thanks to

the enormous increase of the human scale, in which
natural capital is becoming the limiting factor. Human
economic activities can significantly reduce the capacity of natural capital to yield the flow of ecosystem.
goods and services and NNC upon which the very pro-

ductivity of human-made capital depends.
Of course the classical economists (Smith, Malthus,

Ricardo) emphasized

the constraints of natural re-

sources on economic growth, and several more recent
economists, especially environmental and ecological
economists, have explicitly recognized natural resources as an important form of capital that produces
major contributions to human well-being (cf.,, Scott
1955; Daly 1968, 1973, 1977; Page 1977; Randall 1987;
Pearce & Turner 1989). But environmental economics
has, until now, been a tiny subfield far from the mainstream of neoclassical economics, and the role of natural

resources within the mainstream has been deemphasized almost to the point of oblivion. We believe
that, if we are to achieve sustainability, the economy
must be viewed in its proper perspective, as a subsystem

o

1600
&4

5.0

1400

&
5
2 120
5

@ 1000
g
Sg w

o0

000°

o
0%

o

°

°°°°

GNP

°©

°

ISEW1

o
I

00700,

0000
2
0% Dd_.nmnl'-‘“nunnAmﬂAnAuA
aaad
850888

60
400

o A‘MA

888844

A
200

1945

1950

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1965

1990

Year
Figure 2. US. GNP compared with the Index of Sustainable Economic Welfare (ISEW, from Daly & Cobb
1989) for the interval 1950 to 1986. ISEW2 includes
corrections for depletion of nonrenewable resources
and long-term environmental damage; ISEW1 does

not.

of the larger ecological system of which it is a part, and
that environmental and ecological economics need to
become much more pervasive approaches to the problem (Costanza et al. 1991).

natural capital, we may well push welfare down while
‘we think we are building it up.

Substitutability Between Natural and

‘Why Is Accounting for Natural Capital

Man-made Capital

So Important?
In addition to the former smallness of the human scale,
Natural capital produces a significant portion of the real
goods and services of the ecological economic system,

so failure to adequately account for it leads to major

a further reason for the neglect of natural capital has

been the tenet of neoclassical economic theory that human-made capital is a near-perfect substitute for natural

misperceptions about how well the economy is doing.
This misperception is important at all levels of analysis,
from the appraisal of individual projects to the health of
the ecological economic system as a whole. Let us con-

resources, and hence for the natural capital that gener-

centrate on the level of national income accounting,

The prevailing standard model of growth assumes
that
there are no limits on the feasibility of expanding the
supplies of non-human agents of production. It is basically 2 two-factor model in which production depends
only on labor and reproducible capital. Land and resources, the third member of the classical triad, have
generally been dropped ... the tacit justification has
been that reproducible capital is a near perfect substitute for land and other exhaustible resources.

however, because of the importance of these measures
to national planning and sustainability.
There has been much recent interest in improving

national income and welfare measures to account for
depletion of natural capital and other mismeasures of
welfare (cf. Ahmad et al. 1989). Daly and Cobb (1989)
have produced an index of sustainable economic welfare (ISEW) that attempts to account mainly for depletions of natural capital, pollution effects, and income
distribution effects. Figure 2 shows two versions of their

index compared to GNP over the 1950 to 1986 interval.
‘What is strikingly clear from Figure 2 is that while GNP
has been rising over this interval, ISEW has remained
relatively unchanged since about 1970. When depletions of natural capital, pollution costs, and income distribution effects are accounted for, the economy is seen
to be not improving

Conservation Biology
Volume 6, No. 1, March 1992

at all. If we

continue

to ignore

ates the flow of natural resources. In the words

of

Nordhaus and Tobin (1972):

The mathematical form assumed for the production
function can also imply more substitutability than is
there in reality. For example, even if natural capital is
explicitly included in the production function, it makes
little difference as long as the production function is a
form (such as the Cobb-Douglas function) in which natural resources can approach zero with output remaining

constant, and as long as reproducible (manufactured)
capital or labor (human capital) are increased by a compensatory amount. In more technical terms, the elastic-

Natwral Capital

Costanza & Daly

ity of substitution of human-made for natural capital was
assumed to be constant and high.
This assumption of near-perfect substitutability (high
constant elasticity of substitution) has little support in
logic or in fact. It was motivated more by mathematical
convenience than anything else, except perhaps the hubris-driven technological dream of being independent
of nature. Consider the following list of objections to
the tenet of near-perfect substitutibility of human-made
for natural capital:
1.

If human-made capital were a perfect substitute for
natural capital, then natural capital would also be a
perfect substitute for human-made capital. But if the
latter were the case there would be no reason to
develop and accumulate human-made capital in the
first place! Why does one need human-made capital
if one already has an abundance of a near-perfect
substitutes? Historically, we developed humanmade capital as a complement to natural capital, not
as a substitute. It should be obvious that the humanmade

capital

of fishing

nets,

refineries,

saw

mills,

and the human capital skill to run them does not
substitute for, and would

in fact be worthless with-

out, the natural capital of fish populations,

petro-

leum deposits, and forest:

2.

3.

Manufactured

capital

is itself made

out of natural

resources, with the help of human capital (which

also consumes natural resources). Creation of the
“substitute” requires more of the very thing that it is
supposed to substitute for!
A physical analysis of “production” reveals that it is
really a transformation process—a flow of natural

resource inputs is transformed into a flow of prod-

uct outputs by two agents of transformation, the
stock of laborers (human capital) and the stock of
manufactured capital at their disposal. Natural resources are that which is being transformed into a
product (the material cause of production); manufactured and human capital are that which is effecting the transformation (the cfficient cause of pro-

duction). The relationship is overwhelmingly onc of
complementarity, not substitutability.
whelming reason for increasing the stock
made capital is to process a larger flow
capital, not to make possible a reduced
possible to reduce the waste of materials
by investing capital in the recycling
scrap, but this is marginal and limited.

The overof humanof natural
flow. It is
in process
of prompt

The point is that the substitution of human-made
physical capital for natural capital in the production of a
given good is very limited, and that on the whole natural
capital and human-made capital are complements in the
production of any given good. There may remain considerable substitutability between human and manufac-

41

tured capital (the two agents), or among various particular forms of natural capital (aluminum for copper, glass
for aluminum ), or even between NNC and RNC. That is
not in dispute. Nor are we disputing the possibility of
substituting a technically superior product that requires
less energy and materials to render the same human
service (e.g., cars that get more miles per gallon and
light bulbs that give more lumens per watt). The latter
is efficiency-increasing technical progress (development) as opposed to throughput-increasing technical
progress (growth). But for any given product embodying any given level of technical knowledge, humanmade capital and natural capital are, in general, complements,

not substitutes.

Valuation of Natural Capital
The issue of valuation of natural capital is difficult but
essential for many purposes, including aggregation and
determining the optimal scale of human activities. The
valuation of natural capital involves allocation of matterenergy across the boundary separating the economic
subsystem from the ecosystem, and could be referred to
as macro-allocation. By contrast micro-allocation is
the allocation among competing uses of matter-energy
that has already entered the economic subsystem—
allocation proper. The logic defining the two optima is
the same—the optimum is at the point where marginal
costs equal marginal bencfits. But the nature of the cost
and benefit functions in the two cases is very different.

The cost and benefit functions relevant to the microallocation problem are those of individuals bent on maximizing their own private utility both as consumers and
producers. The market coordinates and balances these
individualistic maximizing efforts and in so doing determines a set of relative prices that measure opportunity
cost. Individuals arc allowed to appropriate matterenergy from the ccosystem as required for their individualistic purposes. Since the benefits of such expropriation are mostly private while the costs are largely
social, there is a tendency to overexpand the scale of the
economy—or to “allocate” too much of the matterenergy of the total ecosystem to the economic subsystem. Therefore the macro-allocation or scale problem should be viewed as a social or collective decision
rather than an individualistic market decision. This
means that the cost and benefit functions of macroallocation are at the level of social preferences. A social
preference function may give considerable weight to
individual utility but is certainly not reducible to that
alone. It has a community dimension. The value of community (with other people and other species, both
present and future) must be counted in the cost and
benefit functions associated with macro-allocation
(Daly & Cobb 1989). These community costs and benefits are not captured in micro-allocation market prices.

Conservation Biology
Volume 6. No. 1, March 1992

42

Naral Capital
How then are these nonmarket social costs and ben-

efits measured? One approach is to imagine the valuation to be done by a different Homo economicus than
the neoclassical pure individualist. This broader Homo
economicus (call him H-e 2 to differentiate him from
the neoclassical H-e 1) is a person in community rather
than a pure individualist. H-e 2 is also fully informed
about how the economy is related to the ecosystem and
is constituted in his very identity by the relations of
community with both future generations and other species with whom he shares a place in the sun. H-e 2
would value natural capital according to its relative
long-term potential for supporting life and wealth in
general. This long-term potential is closely associated
with the low entropy matter-energy embodied in the
natural capital. Therefore we offer as one hypothesis for
investigation the idea that natural capital could be evaluated in proportion to its embodied energy (Costanza
1980; Cleveland et al. 1984). The willingness to pay of
H-e 2 (person in community) is hypothesized to be in
accordance with this long-run capacity to support life

and wealth.
But it will be objected that this H-e 2 is not the “real”
one. The “real” one (H-e 1) is generally ignorant of
ecological relations, short-sighted, and individualistic.
The “willingness to pay” of this more usual H-e 1 is the
more common approach to the valuation of natural capital. Both concepts of H-e are abstractions from real people. For the micro-allocation problem we think people
generally behave like the traditional individualistic H-e
1. But when confronted with the macro-allocation problem we think most people would behave more like H-e
2, the person in community. Therefore valuation of natural capital, we submit, should be done by individuals

acting in an entirely different mode from that in which
they operate in consumer markets. H-e 1 is different
from H-e 2, but both are equally real as different aspects
of real human beings relevant to different purposes. At
any rate this is the interpretation we offer for the two
methods of valuation we discuss here: the willingnessto-pay approach and the energy analysis approach.
Because natural capital is not captured in existing
markets, special methods must be used to estimate its
value. These range from attempts to mimic market behavior using surveys and questionnaires to elicit the
preferences of current resource users (i.e., willingnessto-pay [WTP] to methods based on energy analysis [EA]
of flows in natural ecosystems which do not depend on
current human preferences at all). More complete discussions are given in Farber and Costanza (1987) and
Costanza et al. (1989).
There are also problems common to valuing any kind
of capital, including human-made capital. One can generally not value capital directly. The two options in use
for MC are to value the net stream of services produced
by the capital, or to value the cost of forming the capital.

Conservation Biology
Volume 6, No. 1, March 1992

Costanza
& Daly
‘With reference to Figure 1, for RNC this corresponds to
estimating the present value of ecosystem goods and
services production (with, for example, WTP) or to valuing the cost of RNC production (with, for example,
EA). Table 1 summarizes results from a recent study of
average wetland values in coastal Louisiana (a state containing 40% of the coastal wetlands in the United States)
as an example. Details of the methods, especially their
conceptual and empirical assumptions and uncertainties, are contained in Farber and Costanza (1987) and

Costanza et al. (1989).
Discounting
Often the present-vs.-future issue is thought to be objectively decided by discounting. But discounting at
best only reflects the subjective valuation of the future
to presently existing individual members of human society. Discounting is simply a numerical way to operationalize the value judgment that (1) the near future is
‘worth more than the distant future to the present generation of humans, and (2) beyond some point the
‘worth of the future to the present generation of humans
is negligible. Economists tend to treat discounting as
rational, optimizing behavior based on people’s inherent
preferences for current over future consumption.
There is evidence, however, that discounting behavior may be symptomatic of a kind of semirational, suboptimizing behavior known as a “social trap.” A social
trap is any situation in which the short-run, local reinforcements guiding individual behavior are inconsistent
with the long-run, global best interest of the individual
or society (Platt 1973; Cross & Guyer 1980; Costanza
1987). We go through life making decisions about
‘which path to take based largely on the “road signs,” the
short-run, local reinforcements that we perceive most
directly. These short-run reinforcements can include
monetary incentives, social acceptance or admonishment, and physical pleasure or pain. Problems arise,
however, when the road signs are inaccurate or misleading. In these cases we can be trapped into following a
path that is ultimately detrimental because of our reli-

Table 1. Summary of wetland Renewable Natural Capital (RNC)
value for coastal wetlands in Louisiana. Estimates (1983 dollars).

Metbod
WTP based
Commercial fishery
Trapping
Recreation
Storm protection
Total
Option and existence values
EA based
GPP conversion
‘Best estimate”

Per-acre present value
at specified discount rate
8%
3%
s 317
151
46
1915
82,429

?

36,400-10,600
$2,429-6,400

3 846
401
181
7,549
38977

?

$17,000-28,200
$8977-17,000

Natural Capital

Costanza
& Daly
ance on the road signs. Discounting may allow individuals to give too little weight to the future (or other
species, other groups or classes of humans, etc.) and
thus helps to set the trap. Economists, while recognizing
that individual behavior may not always lead to optimal
social behavior, generally assume that discounting the
future is an appropriate thing to do. The psychological
evidence indicates, however, that humans have problems responding to reinforcements that are not immediate (in time and space) and can be led into disastrous
situations because they discount too much.
It can therefore be argued that the discount rate used
by the government for public policy decisions (like valuing natural capital) should be significantly lower than
the rate used by individuals for private investment decisions. The government should have greater interest in
the future than individuals currently in the market because continued social existence, stability, and harmony
are public goods for which the government is responsible, and for which current individuals may not be will-

ing to fully pay (Arrow 1976).
Discounting future value by the rate of interest also
provides a tight link between ecological destruction and
macroeconomic policy. Any exploited species whose
natural rate of population growth is less than the real
rate of interest is under threat of extinction, even in the
absence of common property problems. While Alan
Greenspan and the Federal Reserve probably do not
worry about the effect of US. interest rate policy on

deforestation in the Amazon or destruction of Louisiana
wetlands, such links really do exist, and they probably

should be broken.
In terms of the natural capital valuation problem, all
this merely increases the uncertainty concerning the
total present value because the appropriate discount
rate is uncertain and makes a big difference in the results. In the wetland valuation example mentioned
above, estimates for a range of discount rates (3-8% )
were given to demonstrate how much uncertainty is
introduced by uncertainty in the discount rate. We've
also given arguments for why a lower discount rate may
be more appropriate for natural capital valuation deci-

sions. Indeed there is a reasonable case to be made for
a zero discount rate in decisions taken on behalf of society at large (Page 1977; Georgescu-Roegen 1981),
since society, unlike the individual, is quasi-immortal. A
zero discount rate gives infinite or very large values for
any indefinitely sustainable stream of income. The wants
of future generations will be just as immediate to them
as ours are to us. And if the fears of many climatologists
and ecologists prove correct, productivity growth will
be negative in the long run, so that equity would even
require discounting at a negative rate—that is, future
resources should be valued more highly than present

resources.
Another possibility (Hannon 1985) is that the appro-

43

priate discount rate for natural capital should be linked
to the natural growth and decay rates (see Fig. 1). RNC
will not produce a stream of benefits into the indefinite

future unless it is constantly supplied with new energy
to maintain it against entropic decay. If this energy were
not put into the natural capital stock in question it could
be used to maintain some other natural capital stock.
The “natural” discount rate might therefore be tied to
the average natural decay rate (probably somewhere on
the order of 1-3% per year). This is an issue for further

research.

Growth, Development, and Sustainability
Improvement in human welfare can come about by
pushing more matter-energy through the economy or
by squeezing more human want satisfaction out of each
unit of matter-energy that passes through. These two
processes are so different in their effect on the environment that we must stop conflating them. It is better to
refer to throughput increase as growth, and efficiency
increase as development.* Growth is destructive of natural capital and beyond some point will cost us more
than it is worth—that is, sacrificed natural capital will be
worth more than the extra man-made capital whose production necessitated the sacrifice. At this point growth
has become anti-economic, impoverishing rather than
enriching. Development, that is qualitative improvement does not occur at the expense of natural capital.
There are clear economic limits to growth, but not to
development. This is not to assert that there are no
limits to development, only that they are not so clear as
the limits to growth, and consequently there is room for
a wide range of opinion on how far we can go in increasing human welfare without increasing resource
throughput. How far can development substitute for
growth? This is the relevant question, not how far can
human-made capital substitute for natural capital, the
answer to which, as we have seen, is “hardly at all.”
Some people believe that there are truly enormous
possibilities for development without growth. Energy
efficiency, they argue, can be vastly increased (Lovins
1977; Lovins & Lovins 1987); so can the efficiency of
water use. Potential efficiency increases for other materials are not so clear. Others (Costanza 1980; Cleveland
et al. 1984; Hall et al. 1986; Gever et al. 1986) believe
that the coupling between growth and energy use is not

so loose. This issue arises in the Brundtland Commission’s Report (WCED

1987), which recognizes on the

*Twis distinction is explicit in the dictionary's first definition of
each term. 'To grow means literally“to increase naturally i size by
the addition of material through assimilation or accretion.” To develop means “to expand or realize the potentialities of; bring gradwally to a fuller, greater, or better state.” (The American Heritage
Dictionary of the English Language).

Conservation Biology

Volume
6, No. 1, March 1992

44

Natural Capital

one hand that the scale of the human economy is already unsustainable in the sense that it requires the consumption of natural capital, and on the other hand calls
for further economic expansion by a factor of 5 to 10 to
improve the lot of the poor without having to appeal too
much to the “politically impossible” alternatives of serious population control and redistribution of wealth.
The big question is, how much of this called-for expansion can come from development and how much must
come from growth? This question is not addressed by

Costanza
& Daly

separately. Weak sustainability would require the pricing of natural capital, which as we have just argued itself
requires a given scale, that is, the holding constant of
natural capital at some level, which is to say strong sustainability. So we can concentrate on strong sustainability, maintaining total natural capital intact. What does
this mean operationally?
(1)

the Commission. But statements from the leader of the
'WCED, Jim MacNeil (1990), that “The link between
growth and its impact on the environment has also been

severed” (p. 13), and that “the maxim for sustainable
development is not ‘limits to growth’; it is ‘the growth of
limits,’ ” indicate that WCED expects the lion’s share of
that factor of 5 to 10 to come from development, not
growth. They confusingly use the word “growth” to refer to both cases, saying that future growth must be
qualitatively very different from past growth. When
things are qualitatively different it is best to call them by
different names. Hence our distinction between growth
and development. Our own view is that WCED is too
optimistic—that a factor of 5 to 10 increase cannot
come from development alone, and that if it comes
mainly from growth it will be devastatingly unsustainable. Therefore the welfare of the poor, and indeed of
the rich, depends much more on population control,
consumption control, and redistribution than on the

(2)

(3)

The main principle is to limit the human scale to a
level which, if not optimal, is at least within the
carrying capacity of the remaining natural capital
and therefore sustainable. Once carrying capacity
has been reached, the simultaneous choice of a
population level and an average “standard of living” (level of per capita resource consumption)
becomes necessary. Sustainable development
must deal with sufficiency as well as efficiency and
cannot avoid limiting physical scale.
Technological progress for sustainable development should be efficiency-increasing rather than
throughput-increasing. Limiting the scale of resource throughput by high resource taxes would
induce this technological shift, as discussed further below.
RNC, in both its source and sink functions, should
be exploited on a profit-maximizing sustainedyield basis, and in general stocks, should not be
driven to extinction since they will become ever
more important as NNC runs out. Specifically this

technical fix of a 5- to 10-fold increase in total factor

means that:

productivity.
‘We acknowledge, however, that there is a vast uncertainty on this critical issue of the scope for economic
development from increasing efficiency. We have therefore devised a policy that should be sustainable regardless of who is right in this debate. We save its description for the final section. First some general principles of
sustainable development.

(a) harvesting rates should not exceed regeneration rates; and
(b) waste emissions should not exceed the renewable assimilative capacity of the environ-

Toward Operational Principles of
Sustainable Development
The concept of sustainable development has received
much attention lately, but research into how the concept might be operationalized is only beginning (Pearce
& Turner 1989; Daly 1990; Costanza 1991). Below we
sketch out the broad outlines of some operational principles of sustainability, while acknowledging that we
still have a long way to go (both scientifically and politically) to achieve them. All the more reason to get
started.
Weak sustainability is the maintaining intact of the
sum of human-made and total natural capital. Even that
is not done currently. Strong sustainability is the maintaining intact of natural capital and man-made capital

Conservation Biology
Volume 6, No, 1, March 1992

ment.

(4) NNC should be exploited, but at a rate equal to the
creation of renewable substitutes. Nonrenewable
projects should be paired with renewable projects
and their joint rate of return should be calculated
on the basis of their income component only, since
that is what is perpetually available for consumption in each future year. It has been shown (El Serafy 1989) how this division of receipts into capital
to be reinvested and income available for current
consumption depends on the discount rate (rate of
growth of the renewable substitute) and the life
expectancy of the NNC (reserves divided by annual
depletion). The faster the growth of the renewable
substitute and the longer the life expectancy of the
NNC, the greater will be the income component
and the less the capital set-aside. “Substitute” here
should be interpreted broadly to include any systemic adaptation that allows the economy to adjust
to the depletion of the nonrenewable resource in a
‘way that maintains future income at present levels
(e.g., recycling).

Costanza
& Daly

Natural Capial

Specific application of principle (3) might, for example, involve such requirements as no net depletion of
aquifers or of topsoil (on the input side) and no net
increase in soil acidity, salinization, or toxification (on
the waste output side). Principle (1), general respect for
carrying capacity, can be straightforwardly applied in
rangelands, but can also be extended to industrial projects by requiring that all natural capital used by the
industry be maintained without depletion.
These principles move us some distance toward operationalizing the basic notion that we should satisfy the
needs of the present without sacrificing the ability of
future populations to meet their needs. But they clearly
fall far short of an operational blueprint complete with
measurements. However, as argued in the following section, the principles are operational enough to guide
some important policy changes without precise measures of assimilative capacities and sustainable yields.
Uncertainty itself is one of the critical factors that must
be addressed in designing sustainable policies.

A Fail-Safe Policy Proposal to
Achieve Sustainability
‘We end with 2 policy proposal that is simple in concept
(though not in implementation) and that accomplishes
much toward the end of sustainable development. In
spite of the disagreement over how much to expect
from development without growth, both sides should

be able to agree

on the following.

Strive to hold

throughput (consumption of TNC) constant at present
levels (or lower truly sustainable levels) by taxing TNC
consumption, especially energy, very heavily. Seek to
raise most public revenue from such a natural capital

depletion (NCD) tax, and compensate by reducing the
income tax, especially on the lower end of the income
distribution, perhaps even financing a negative income
tax at the very low end. Technological optimists who
believe that efficiency can increase by a factor of ten
should welcome this policy, which raises natural resource prices considerably and would powerfully encourage just those technological advances in which they
have so much faith. Skeptics who lack that technological
faith will nevertheless be happy to see the throughput
limited since that is their main imperative in order to
conserve resources for the future. The skeptics are protected against their worst fears; the optimists are encouraged to pursue their fondest dreams. If the skeptics
are proven wrong and the enormous increase in efficiency actually happens, then they will be even happier
(unless they are total misanthropists). They got what
they wanted, but it just cost less than they expected and
were willing to pay. The optimists, for their part, can
hardly object to a policy that not only allows but offers
strong incentives for the very technical progress on

45

which their optimism is based. If they are proved wrong
at least they should be glad that the rate of environmen-

tal destruction has been slowed.
Implementation of this policy does not hinge upon
the precise measurement of natural capital. The valuation issue remains relevant in the sense that our policy
recommendation is based on the perception that we are
at or beyond the optimal scale. The evidence for this
perception consists of the greenhouse effect, ozone
layer depletion, acid rain, and general decline in many
dimensions of the quality of life. It would be helpful to
have better quantitative measures of these perceived
costs, just as it would be helpful to carry along an altimeter when we jump out of an airplane. But we would all
prefer a parachute to an altimeter if we could take only
one thing. The consequences of an unarrested free fall
are clear enough without a precise measure of our
speed and acceleration. But we would need at least a
ballpark estimate of the value of natural capital depletion in order to determine the magnitude of the suggested NCD tax. This, we think, is possible, especially if
uncertainty about the value of natural capital is incorporated in the tax itself, using, for example, the refundable assurance bonding system proposed by Costanza
and Perrings (1990).
The political feasibility of this policy is an important
and difficult question. It certainly represents a major
shift in the way we view our relationship to natural
capital and would have major social, economic, and political implications. But these implications are just the
ones we need to expose and face squarely if we hope to
achieve sustainability. Because of its logic, its conceptual simplicity, and its built-in market incentive structure leading to sustainability, the proposed NCD tax
may be the most politically feasible of the possible alternatives to achieving sustainability.

‘We have not tried to work out all the details of how
the NCD tax would be administered. In general, it could
be administered like any other tax, but it would probably require international agreements or at least national
ecological tariffs to prevent some countries from flooding markets with untaxed natural capital or products
made with untaxed natural capital. By shifting most of
the tax burden to the NCD tax and away from income
taxes, the NCD tax could actually simplify the administration of the taxation system while providing the appropriate economic incentives to achieve sustainability.

Acknowledgments
This paper was originally prepared for a workshop on
natural capital organized by Barry Sadler for the Cana-

dian Environmental

Assessment

Research

Council

(CEARC) and held in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, March 15 and 16 1990. We thank the participants at

Conservation Biology
Volume 6, No. 1, March 1992

46

Costanza
& Daly

Natural Capital

the workshop for feedback on early drafts of the paper,
as well as John Cumberland, Dennis King, Colin Clark,
and one anonymous reviewer for detailed and helpful
suggestions on a subsequent draft.

‘World Bank, Washington, D.C.

Literature Cited

Farber, S, and R. Costanza. 1987. The economic value of wet-

Abmad, Y.J,, S. El Serafy, and E. Lutz. 1989. Environmental
accounting for sustainable development. A UNEP—World
Bank Symposium. The World Bank, Washington, D.C.

lands systems. Journal of Environmental Management 24:41—

Arrow, K.J. 1976. The rate of discount for long-term public
investment. In H. Ashley, R. L. Rudman, and C. Shipple, editors.

Energy and the environment: a risk benefit approach. Pergamon Press, New York.
Cleveland, C.J., R. Costanza, C.A.S. Hall, and R. Kaufmann.

1984. Energy and the United States economy: a biophysical

perspective. Science 255:890-897.

Costanza, R. 1980. Embodied energy and economic valuation.
Science 210:1219-1224.
Costanza, R. 1987. Social traps and environmental policy. Bio-

Science 37:407-412.

El Serafy, S. 1989. The proper calculation of income form de-

pletable natural resources. Pages 10-18 in Y.J. Ahmad, S. El
Serafy, and E. Lutz, editors. Environmental accounting for sus-

tainable development. A UNEP—World Bank Symposium. The

51
‘Georgescu-Roegen,

N.

1981.

Energy, matter, and economic

valuation: where do we stand? Pages 43-79 in H. E. Daly and
A.F. Umafia, editors. Energy, economics, and the environment:

conflicting views of an essential interrelationship. AAAS Selected Symposium 64. Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado.
Gever, J., R. Kaufmann,

D. Skole, and C. Vorosmarty.

1986.

Beyond oil: the threat to food and fuel in the coming decades.
Ballinger, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 304 pp.
Hall, C.A.S,, C.J. Cleveland, and R. Kaufmann.

1986. Energy

and resource quality: the ecology of the economic process.

John Wiley & Sons, New York. 577 pp.

Hannon, B. 1985, Ecosystem, flow analysis. Canadian Journal
of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 213:97-118.

Costanza, R. editor. 1991. Ecological economics: the science

and management of sustainability. Columbia University Press,

New York. 525 pp.

Costanza, R., H. E. Daly, and J. A. Bartholomew. 1991. Goals,
agenda, and policy recommendations for ecological econom-

ics. Pages 1-21 in R. Costanza, editor. Ecological economics:

the science and management of sustainability. Columbia Uni-

versity Press, New York. 525 pp.

Costanza, R., S. C. Farber, andJ. Maxwell. 1989. The valuation

and management of wetland ecosystems. Ecological Economics 1:335-362.
Costanza, R., and C. Perrings. 1990. A flexible assurance bond-

ing system for improved environmental management. Ecological Economics 2:57-76.
Cross, J. G, and M. J. Guyer. 1980. Social traps. University of
Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

Lovins, A. B. 1977. Soft energy paths: toward a durable peace.

Ballinger, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Lovins, A. B., and L. H. Lovins. 1987. Energy: the avoidable oil
crisis. The Atlantic (December): 22--30.
MacNeil, J. 1990. Sustainable development economics, and the

growth imperative. Background Paper No. 3, Workshop on the

Economics of Sustainable Development, January 23. Washington, D.C.

Nordhaus, W., and J. Tobin. 1972. Is growth obsolete? National
Bureau of Economic Research, Columbia University Press,

New York.

Page, T. 1977. Conservation and economic efficiency: an approach to materials policy. Resources for the Future, Wash-

ington, D.C. 266 pp.

Daly, H.E. 1968. On economics as a life science. Journal of

Pearce, D. W, and R K. Turner. 1989. Economics of natural
resources and the environment, Wheatsheaf, Brighton, UK.

Daly, H.E. 1973. Toward a steady-state economy. W.H. Free-

Pezzey, J. 1989. Economic analysis of sustainable growth and
sustainable development. Environment department working

Political Economy 76:392-406.

man and Co., San Francisco, California.

paper No. 15. The World Bank, Washington, D.C.

Daly, H. 1977. Steady-state economics: the political economy

Platt, J. 1983. Social traps. American Psychologist 28:642-651.

and Co., San Francisco, California.

Randall, A. 1987. Resource economics. 2nd ed. John Wiley &
Sons, New York.

of bio-physical equilibrium and moral growth. W.H. Freeman

Daly, H. E. 1990. Toward some operational principles of sus-

tainable development. Ecological Economics 2:1-6.

Scott, A. D. 1955. Natural resources: the economics of conser‘vation. University of Toronto Press, Toronto, Canada.

Daly, H.E, and J. B. Cobb, Jr. 1989. For the common

redirecting the economy

good:

toward community, the environ-

ment, and a sustainable future. Beacon Press, Boston, Massachusetts. 482 pp.

Conservation Biology
Volume 6, No. 1, March 1992

'WCED.

1987. Our common

future: report of the world com-

mission on environment and development. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, England.

