Science of the Total Environment 824 (2022) 153673

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Science of the Total Environment
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/scitotenv

Evaluating natural capital performance of urban development through
system dynamics: A case study from London
⁎

Jimmy O'Keeffe a,e, , Irene Pluchinotta c, Simon De Stercke d, Caitlin Hinson a,b, Pepe Puchol-Salort d, Ana Mijic d,
Nici Zimmermann c, Alexandra M. Collins a
a

Centre for Environmental Policy, Imperial College London, UK
Science and Solutions for a Changing Planet DTP, Imperial College London, UK
Institute for Environmental Design and Engineering, The Bartlett Faculty of the Built Environment, University College London, UK
d
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Imperial College London, London, UK
e
School of History and Geography, Dublin City University, Ireland
b
c

H I G H L I G H T S

G R A P H I C A L

A B S T R A C T

• A new system dynamics tool to assess
urban development impacts on natural
capital.
• The Natural Space Performance metric indicates environmental change in urban
spaces.
• Our tool captures spatiotemporal urban
development and environmental interactions.

A R T I C L E

I N F O

Article history:
Received 15 July 2021
Received in revised form 28 January 2022
Accepted 31 January 2022
Available online 4 February 2022
Editor: Paulo Pereira
Keywords:
Natural space performance
Ecosystem services
System dynamics
Natural capital
London

A B S T R A C T

Natural capital plays a central role in urban functioning, reducing ﬂooding, mitigating urban heat island effects, reducing air pollution, and improving urban biodiversity through provision of habitat space. There is also evidence on the
role played by blue and green space in improving physical and mental health, reducing the burden on the health
care service. Yet from an urban planning and development view, natural capital may be considered a nice to have,
but not essential element of urban design; taking up valuable space which could otherwise be used for traditional
built environment uses. While urban natural capital is largely recognised as a positive element, its beneﬁts are difﬁcult
to measure both in space and time, making its inclusion in urban (re)development difﬁcult to justify. Here, using a
London case study and information provided by key stakeholders, we present a system dynamics (SD) modelling
framework to assess the natural capital performance of development and aid design evaluation. A headline indicator:
Natural Space Performance, is used to evaluate the capacity of natural space to provide ecosystem services, providing a
semi-quantitative measure of system wide impacts of change within a combined natural, built and social system. We
demonstrate the capacity of the model to explore how combined or individual changes in development design can affect natural capital and the provision of ecosystem services, for example, biodiversity or ﬂood risk. By evaluating natural capital and ecosystem services over time, greater justiﬁcation for their inclusion in planning and development can
be derived, providing support for increased blue and green space within cities, improving urban sustainability and enhancing quality of life. Furthermore, the application of a SD approach captures key interactions between variables over
time, showing system evolution while highlighting intervention opportunities.

⁎ Corresponding author at: School of History and Geography, Dublin City University, Ireland.
E-mail addresses: jimmy.okeeffe@dcu.ie (J. O'Keeffe), i.pluchinotta@ucl.ac.uk (I. Pluchinotta), simon.destercke@imperial.ac.uk (S. De Stercke), c.hinson19@imperial.ac.uk (C. Hinson),
j.puchol-salort18@imperial.ac.uk (P. Puchol-Salort), ana.mijic@imperial.ac.uk (A. Mijic), n.zimmermann@ucl.ac.uk (N. Zimmermann), alexandra.collins@imperial.ac.uk (A.M. Collins).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.153673
0048-9697/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

J. O'Keeffe et al.

Science of the Total Environment 824 (2022) 153673

1. Introduction

condition, and incorporate diverse stakeholders requirements and opinions
across scales, sectors and knowledge systems, show promise, but are underdeveloped at present (Bateman and Mace, 2020).
A number of modelling platforms have been created to evaluate bluegreen infrastructure and the outcomes of development on urban NC and
ESS. These include the Natural Capital Planning Tool (NCPT) (Holzinger
et al., 2019), InVEST (Hamel et al., 2021) and the Beneﬁts Estimation
tool (B£ST) (Horton et al., 2019). NCPT allows the impacts of new or proposed developments on NC or ESS to be assessed, with outputs described
through a development impact score. InVEST is a suite of modelling tools
designed to support city planning by providing information on natural infrastructure and the services it provides to people, complementing more
comprehensive planning tools that capture built infrastructure and socioeconomic dimensions (Hamel et al., 2021). B£ST was created to help assess
and monetise the ﬁnancial, social and environmental beneﬁts of blue-green
infrastructure, with a focus on sustainable urban drainage and natural ﬂood
management. Such models are extremely useful tools and help address critical gaps in evaluating NC and ESS, in some cases providing outputs which
can be further utilised in other modelling frameworks. Yet, while they consider interactions between variables, the representation of system evolution
over time is more challenging and results are predominantly provided in a
pre- and post-development format, highlighting whether there is any net
gain in assessed ESS from existing to new land uses. To fully understand
built and natural environment systems and the implications of change, it
is important to assess how they interact and evolve over time (Meadows
and Wright, 2008). Doing so helps decision makers better understand the
trajectory of change, identify tipping points and areas where timely interjections can improve outcomes while helping facilitate discussion among
stakeholders.
System dynamics (SD) is an approach for conceptualising, analysing and
understanding dynamic complex systems (Sterman, 2000). Based on closed
chains of relations and feedbacks, SD modelling is well suited to representing the complexity of the integrated built and natural environment (Coletta
et al., 2020; Giordano et al., 2019). It provides a useful tool for urban architects, planners, developers and decision makers to identify appropriate design and management strategies while helping policy makers develop
sustainable approaches to urban planning (see Hall et al., 2013; Whyte
et al., 2020). Using participatory modelling and Group Model Building SD
is a well-known tool to allow participation in practice (e.g., Vennix et al.,
1996). While SD modelling has been used to explore urban design challenges (e.g., Pluchinotta et al., 2021a), it is also uniquely suited to evaluate
the ESS of a proposed or existing blue or green space. As SD modelling is
based on integral equations to represent variables as stocks, and changes
in these as ﬂows (Eker et al., 2018), the methodology has potential to
help improve the conceptualisation of NC and the inﬂuence land use planning decisions can have on it and the services it provides.
Through the use of group modelling exercises, SD modelling also facilitates a participatory approach (Eker et al., 2018), allowing the inclusion of
stakeholders views (Pluchinotta et al., 2021a). Within environmental decision making the importance of stakeholder participation has long been
recognised at the international and local level (Reed et al., 2009; UN,
1992; UNECE, 1998) and has been identiﬁed as essential for fair, sustainable (Gokhelashvili, 2015; Reed et al., 2009) high quality and durable decisions (Beierle, 2002; Fisher et al., 2009; Reed et al., 2009). However,
participation is often identiﬁed as lacking within the NC and urban ESS approaches (Campbell-Arvai and Lindquist, 2021). If the urban ESS concept is
to be a useful tool for sustainable urban planning, stakeholders' perceptions
of urban ESS should be considered more carefully in research (Luederitz
et al., 2015). Additionally, participatory modelling can empower local
stakeholders through the inclusion of their views, concerns and aspirations
in the decision making process (Klain and Chan, 2012). In this paper, using
stakeholder knowledge as a foundation, we develop a SD model representing urban development to explore the potential of the approach in articulating the impacts on and beneﬁts of NC. The novelty of our work lies in using
SD to understand and evaluate NC within a complex and changing human
and natural environment. However, our primary goal is a dynamic

Natural Capital (NC); the stocks of renewable and non-renewable natural resources that beneﬁt people both directly and indirectly, and the ﬂow
of ecosystem services (ESS) these provide, have been increasingly
recognised for their central role in sustaining economic and social
wellbeing, societal resilience and sustainable development (Bateman and
Mace, 2020; Guerry et al., 2015). As a result, NC has been incorporated
into government policy processes (Department for Environment Food and
Rural Affairs, 2020) and private sector decision making (Natural Capital
Coalition, 2016; La Notte et al., 2017; Seppelt et al., 2011). For instance,
it has been shown that NC and the ﬂow of ESS signiﬁcantly contribute to
global and national gross domestic product (GDP) (Bradbury et al., 2021;
Costanza et al., 2014) and underpin human wellbeing (Dasgupta, 2021).
ESS are also produced by ecological structures within urban areas
(Gutman, 2007; Jansson, 2013; McGranahan et al., 2005), and with over
half of the Earth's population now living in cities, and with rates of urbanisation increasing globally (United Nations, 2018), it is increasingly important to understand urban ESS; those that are either directly produced by
ecological structures within urban or peri-urban areas, and the humanenvironment systems they depend upon (Bettencourt and West, 2010;
Luederitz et al., 2015). Yet, there is a paucity of studies investigating ESS
and NC generated in urban or peri-urban areas and a clear need for tools
that can explain the value and beneﬁts of nature in urban areas (Haase
et al., 2014; Luederitz et al., 2015).
Unchecked and poorly planned urban development pose signiﬁcant
challenges to the provision of ESS. This is exacerbated by a lack of understanding of the inherent complexity within the built and natural environment system. In addition, ESS rarely conform to property, administrative
or sectorial boundaries, leading to difﬁculties in management and regulation. However, Green Infrastructure (GI), the strategically planned network
of natural or semi natural areas (European Commission, 2019) and Nature
Based Solutions (NBS), approaches to help address societal challenges that
involve working with and enhancing nature (Cohen-Sacham et al., 2016;
European Commission (EC), 2015; Seddon et al., 2020), are increasingly
seen as innovative solutions to transform NC into a source of green growth
and sustainable development (Gómez Martín et al., 2020). While there is increasing support for GI and NBS in policy and planning documents, their actual implementation has been slow and examples of high quality NBS is the
exception rather than the norm (see Fisher et al. (2020), Jerome et al.
(2019) and Matthews et al. (2015)). There have been a number of reasons
why this is the case including conﬂation of GI and NBS with traditional
green spaces; the continued siloed approach to policy issues where NBS
could play a role; a devaluing of NBS in local planning processes; a lack of
consideration of long-term stewardship of GI and uncertainty as to what
makes GI successful (Fisher et al., 2020). Yet, GI and NBS (used interchangeably in this paper) present a valid alternative to grey infrastructure
for coping with climate-related risks in urban and rural areas alike
(Calliari et al., 2019; Frantzeskaki, 2019; Giordano et al., 2019; Raymond
et al., 2017). National, regional and local priorities in areas such as housing
and highways often override environmental concerns (Pluchinotta et al.,
2021b). Therefore, making explicit the long term societal and environmental contribution of NC is crucial to its implementation in urban design.
A comprehensive planning approach has the potential to harmonize
human–environment interactions and mitigate the harmful impacts of urbanisation (Puchol-Salort et al., 2021). Such an approach requires planners
and local decision makers to understand and value nature's multiple contributions to the quality of urban life, through a whole systems approach. A
recent study of decision makers in local authorities found a need for simple
tools that allow incorporation of the importance of nature and green infrastructure into development projects (Pluchinotta et al., 2021b). Achieving
this presents signiﬁcant challenges, largely due to framework limitations
and a lack of suitable headline indicators for assessing NC performance
and measuring trade-offs between multiple interacting elements
(Bateman and Mace, 2020). Emerging techniques that use outcome-based
metrics and incremental management to progressively enhance ecosystem
2

J. O'Keeffe et al.

Science of the Total Environment 824 (2022) 153673

representation of Urban Natural Capital (UNC), improving our understanding of the trade-offs and opportunities of socio-economic, built and natural
environment change.
In Section 2 we provide a description of the study area; an urban space
containing a signiﬁcant amount of NC which is currently undergoing redevelopment. This is followed by an overview of the collaborative investigation of the Thamesmead area. Section 3 describes the translation of this
knowledge into a SD model capable of evaluating the performance of natural space. The model is then applied to the study area in Section 4 where a
number of different scenarios are explored to demonstrate the efﬁcacy of
the approach to support the understanding of how NC and ESS in urban environments may be affected by new development.

network; 5 neighbourhood parks; and 14 Sites of Nature Conservation
Interest (SNCI) (Askew, 2018). Recent studies estimate the potential NC
value of the blue and green space of Thamesmead to be at least £306 million or £257 per resident per year (Askew, 2018; Vivid Economics, 2018).
However, most of the blue and green space in the study area is underused
by the residents with signiﬁcant area currently inaccessible. The application of the model is based on the Thamesmead Waterfront Development;
a new site which does not currently have a population (see Fig. 1).

2. Materials and methods

SD modelling processes can include both qualitative/conceptual and
quantitative/numerical modelling phases (e.g. Pagano et al., 2019). Within
the Thamesmead case study, a participatory qualitative modelling process
was carried out to bring together organizational and institutional stakeholders,
including developers, regulatory bodies, NGO's and local Government, to
jointly scope the focus of several quantitative SD models around the built
and natural environment and sustainability. Speciﬁcally, the qualitative
modelling phase aimed (i) to collaboratively identify a shared concern
(namely a shared formulation of a “problem” which serves as a representation of the different concerns and stakes carried by the different stakeholders, see Ostanello and Tsoukiàs, 1993; Pluchinotta et al., 2019); (ii)
to build a number of Causal Loop Diagrams (CLD) around the identiﬁed
shared concern in order to gather knowledge on the system and to capture
different perceptions from each stakeholder group. The identiﬁed shared
concern was: how best to sustain and increase the quality of Built/Blue/
Green space to ensure long term stewardship. Between 10 and 15 stakeholders participated in each workshop. A detailed description of the participatory qualitative modelling process is described in (Pluchinotta et al.,
2021b).

2.2. Collaborative investigation of the Thamesmead blue-green and built
environment

2.1. The study area: Thamesmead Waterfront Development
Originally built as part of the 1967 Greater London Council (GLC)
Masterplan, Thamesmead is a 750 ha neighbourhood located in Southeast
London. It sits between two London boroughs (Greenwich and Bexley)
and is comprised predominantly of social housing, featuring post-war architecture (Cherry and Pevsner, 1983). Since completion, housing and infrastructure in the area has deteriorated signiﬁcantly. A regeneration and
development programme, led by the primary owners of the land; Peabody
Housing Association, was initiated in 2014. The current population of
Thamesmead is approximately 45,000 people in 16,000 housing units, approximately 6500 of which are owned by Peabody (Ford and Baikie, 2018).
This number is expected to increase to approximately 100,000 residents by
2050 following redevelopment (Puchol-Salort et al., 2021). There are over
150 ha of blue and green space within the wider Thamesmead area, 65% of
which is owned by Peabody (Askew, 2018; Puchol-Salort et al., 2021). It includes 32 ha of water bodies with several lakes and more than 7 km of canal

Fig. 1. Thamesmead Waterfront Development area. The red line on the main map denotes the study site boundaries.

3

J. O'Keeffe et al.

Science of the Total Environment 824 (2022) 153673

Therefore, the SD model presented was developed using both qualitative and quantitative information obtained through a combination of discussions with key stakeholders and subject experts. Information includes
relevant variables for UNC and GI functioning in the study area, for example local population, the area of built and natural space, biodiversity, access
to space and rainfall runoff.
A CLD describing the framework is presented in Fig. 2. The balancing
loops B2 and B3, show how the ‘biodiversity performance’ and the related
‘natural space performance’ is highly dependent on both the quantity of ‘developed land' and ‘natural space’. Similarly, B4 and B5 link the ‘hydrological performance’ with land type. The CLD includes an implicit link between
‘natural space performance’ and the desire to move to a particular area. The
current version of the SD model does not include this aspect due to lack of
robust data for parametrization. Moreover, the hydrological link between
the built environment and run off was also included in the CLD for completeness, but not in the SD model, as this version was primarily focused
on evaluating the performance of the natural space surrounding the development. This will be addressed in a future version as the model in its current form does not explicitly include the built environment. The model
structure and simulated scenarios, along with references to relevant data
sources are outlined in the following sections and in Appendix A: Model
documentation.

At the end of the participatory qualitative phase, as described in
Pluchinotta et al. (2021b), stakeholders identiﬁed NC and Natural Space
Performance (NSP) as one of the key issues and a priority to investigate,
via a voting poll and a group discussion. Afterwards, several modelling sessions between academic experts were held for the creation of the CLD presented in Fig. 2 and the related SD model, which focused on changes in the
quality of natural space from a NC viewpoint. The model can evaluate the
capacity of natural space within the study area to provide ESS over time
in relation to change.
The modellers developed the main structure, equations and parameter
values of the SD model mainly using the information gathered from the scientiﬁc literature and technical reports (Please see Appendix A of this paper
for further details). Experts in hydrology (5), NC (2) and urban environment (2) also shared their knowledge and supported the main modellers
during the process. The modelling meetings were mainly between 1 or 2 experts and the modellers and focused on discussing and improving speciﬁc
sectors of the model. Following the completion of the model prototype,
an additional stakeholder workshop was held with key stakeholders
(namely members of social-environmental NGOs working in the area with
speciﬁc technical knowledge), during which the model structure and operation was described and validated. While participants suggested alternative
equations, which could be used for variable change calculation, the overall
structure of the framework was deemed to be accurate. The validation activity lasted two hours and involved a request for feedback on the overall
structure of the model and focused on speciﬁc items of the model, for example, the type of land, the dynamics of change in developable land and the
idea of the space performance indicator. In addition, during the validation
activity, the stakeholders highlighted the usefulness of the framework, both
for system understanding and information dissemination.

3. A natural capital system dynamics model as evaluation framework
for urban development
The model described in the following sections centres on the interconnections between the natural and human environment. Key variables and
connections outlined by stakeholders and experts form the core of the

Fig. 2. CLD to describe the connections and feedback between variables highlighted by case study stakeholders. Dashed lines refer (1) to the implicit connection between the
natural space performance and housing demand via the attractiveness of the area and desire to live there; (2) the creation of runoff from built area which was not explicitly
included in the current version of the model.
4

J. O'Keeffe et al.

Science of the Total Environment 824 (2022) 153673

its maintenance, safety and aesthetics. Therefore, the model accounts for
the feedback between the performance of the natural space and its attractiveness and how that inﬂuences the number of people moving into and
out of a location. However, in the current implementation of the model
the latter is not used as an input; in other words, actual occupancy of the
houses built does not feature.

developed model providing a generic framework capable of representing
the impacts of change in many urban settings, including policy, management or design interventions, as well as social and environmental variations
on the performance of natural space. This includes changes in population,
climate and different management strategies and how these are likely to
play out over a particular time frame. We describe the model rationale
and equations in the following sections. However, the authors stress that
while the model equations and parameters are appropriate in the context
of the case study application, they can be changed and updated as needed
to ensure the framework is relevant to each location. The aim of this adaptable framework is to provide a means of evaluating how portfolios comprising of different natural, built and social elements affect the provision of NC
and therefore the sustainability of related decisions.

The participatory modelling process and subsequent reﬁnement of the
model resulted in the variables and associated connections described in
the sections below and shown graphically in Figs. 2, 3 and 4. In order to
minimise bias, the values for the baseline model run were set through inclusion of inputs from a wide range of stakeholders through an extended participatory modelling process that was carried out within the case study. The
model runs on a timestep of 1/8th of a year in order to provide model stability and efﬁciency.

3.1.2. Planning and policy
While population and the subsequent need to provide accommodation
are among the most dominant drivers for change in housing demand, individual developments are also inﬂuenced by local and national government
policy, as well as development opportunities taken up by private developers. This may include large scale construction leading to the transformation of a brown or greenﬁeld site into a new residential or commercial area.
These large-scale development decisions can signiﬁcantly and quickly impact the landscape and are separate and more impactful than gradual
changes driven by individual or small-scale house building projects. This
modelling framework can directly incorporate proposed or approved development plans including, for example, the number and size of housing units,
and the area of land used and time scales. An example of the latter is the development cycle of housing construction, which in the Thamesmead case
study has a period of 5 years. Individual housing unit types and their characteristics, including area, number of ﬂoors and at what stage during the
modelling run they will be constructed, are explicitly included in the model.

3.1.1. Population (expected and actual)
Change in population is a primary driver of housing demand and
represent one of the main reasons behind the Thamesmead Waterfront
Development project. While this modelling framework has the capacity to
directly model changes in population through the number of people
moving into and out of an area, birth and death rates, we instead use the
projected population (Askew, 2018), in order to explore the outcomes of
planned and potential future scenarios. There are many factors which inﬂuence the number of people moving into and out of a location, including the
quality of its blue and green space. Data shows that properties less than 100
m from green space are on average £2500 more expensive than those
greater than 500 m from green spaces (Ofﬁce for National Statistics,
2019). Desirability is also inﬂuenced by the quality of the natural space
offer which includes the ecological quality and the condition of the space,

3.1.3. Built space
This is the area of land in hectares either available for development
(Developable Land) or has already been converted to developed land
(Built Area). An initial developable land value is set at the beginning of
the model run based on-site speciﬁc information. During the model run,
this value can increase by re-zoning land from the other land use types,
predominantly natural space, though the model can also consider the
impracticality of developing some types of land, for example blue space
or wetlands. The parameters for which this occurs are set by the modeller
and depend on local policy and development plans. Changes in the amount
of developable land is driven by the demand; typically, through an increase
in population and the need to develop housing and associated infrastructure. The type of development depends on the local needs and
characteristics.

3.1. Model structure

Fig. 3. Schematic overview of the model highlighting key variables and how they are connected within the modelling framework. Natural Space Performance (NSP) is the
headline indicator. Changes in Development can take place directly, through actual increases in population (Option 1), or indirectly through the creation of a development
plan created to accommodate a projected population (Option 2). The dashed line between the natural space performance and the population is an implicit link, not currently
represented in the model outputs.
5

J. O'Keeffe et al.

Science of the Total Environment 824 (2022) 153673

Fig. 4. Representation of natural space performance for each individual land use type within the modelling framework. The order of calculations goes from left to right.

increased number of extreme rainfall events due to changes in climate.
This is accounted for within the framework by including a hydrological performance metric.
Based on a methodology described by Whitford et al. (2001), the approach accounts for land use type, its permeability and generation of runoff:

3.1.4. Natural space
We designate Natural Space as all land types which are not part of the
built or developable land. It may also include reclaimed undevelopable
land, which cannot be developed on but can also provide ESS. In our
study area this represents a reclaimed landﬁll with the capacity to provide
additional natural space for residents. Within the modelling framework the
natural space area can be reduced and converted into Developable Land
and Built Area, representing the spatial impacts of development on natural
space area. Each natural land type, including grassland, woodland, wetland
and bluespace, is treated separately. Their areas are converted into developable land area in an order and at a rate of change determined by the modeller, with inputs based on development plans. In the current model
setup, once the initial developable land stock is exhausted, grassland is converted to developable land and built upon, followed by woodland. Marsh &
Wetland, Blue-Space and Reclaimed Undevelopable Land are not impacted
by development in this model application; however, this can be changed by
the model user. The thresholds for land use, deﬁned as the limits which an
area of a land type can be reduced to, are also set by the modeller, and can
be based on existing or proposed land use plans.

Pe ¼

(2)

Where Pe is run off, P is precipitation (the model uses average annual rainfall), S is the maximum retention of the area where the greater the S value,
the smaller the run-off. The value of S in mm, is given by:
S¼

2540
−25:4
CN

(3)

Where CN is the curve number which describes the land type and conditions. Fully impermeable and water surfaces have a CN value of 100. In
this case S will be 0, whereas when the CN < 100, S will be positive. The
curve number values in this application are taken from the USDA Hydrologic Soil-Cover Complexes (2004) and expert judgment. However, the
practical design values of land use types validated by experience lie in the
range of 40 to 98 (Deshmukh et al., 2013; Van Mullem, 1989). This results
in a value for run off generated over the course of the year which is compared to the precipitation and converted into an indicator 1-Pe/P. An
area-weighted average of these values for the different land types is then
normalised by the best-performing land type. This then becomes an overall
performance metric. The value of which can range from 0 to 1, where 0 is
poor performance likely to result in ﬂooding and 1 is excellent performance
less likely to result in ﬂooding. This calculation is undertaken individually
for each land use type.

3.1.5. Natural space variables
3.1.5.1. Biodiversity. The natural space biodiversity performance is assessed
using the Biodiversity Metric 2.0 (Natural England et al., 2019), which provides a value in the form of biodiversity units (BU) based on the following
equation:
Area∗Distinctiveness∗Condition∗Strategic Location∗Connectivity
¼ Biodiversity Units

ðP−0:2SÞ2
P þ 0:8S

(1)

In the model the calculated BU are compared to the maximum BU to
provide a metric for biodiversity where 0 is the lowest quality and 1 is
the highest. Data describing the condition of the habitat within the natural
area is normally collected through a mixture of available surveys, and site
visits. In the absence of collected ﬁeld information, suitable values from literature can be used. A full description of the approach is outlined in the Biodiversity Metric 2.0 documentation (Natural England et al., 2019). In this
application, due to a lack of suitable ﬁeld derived data, we use expert opinion to approximate values for Condition, Strategic Location and Connectivity. Area for each land use type is outlined in Appendix A. This calculation is
undertaken individually for each land use type.

3.1.7. Access
Here deﬁned as the physical and social capacity to engage with blue and
green space, accessibility forms a central component in the provision of societal beneﬁts from urban space. There is a growing body of evidence to support that access can play an important role in improving and maintaining
mental and physical health (van den Berg et al., 2015; Gascon et al., 2016;
Ofﬁce of National Statistics and Public Health England, 2020). It has been
shown that this accessibility is particularly important for more vulnerable
socio-economic and minority ethnic groups who derive a disproportionately
high beneﬁt from parks and green space, despite being less likely to live
close to them (Mayor of London, 2020). The variables highlighted as most
important by key stakeholders and experts include physical obstacles,
proximity, transport, and the availability of facilities. These were also
outlined in Public Health England's Improving access to greenspace
(Ofﬁce of National Statistics and Public Health England, 2020). Accessibility

3.1.6. Hydrological performance
A signiﬁcant impact of urbanisation is the change in the natural water
ﬂow regime. This is most evident during urban ﬂooding events, where percolation of water to aquifers is prevented by built impermeable surfaces.
These surfaces also speed up the overland ﬂow of water to rivers leading
to increased ﬂuvial ﬂooding. Flooding has been further exacerbated by an
6

J. O'Keeffe et al.

Science of the Total Environment 824 (2022) 153673

possibility of further utilisation, generating an opportunity cost that may
or may not be known when decisions are made (Bateman and Mace, 2020).
Following Yun et al. (2017), we consider ESS as a portfolio of assets. The
overall performance of the portfolio depends on the performance of the underlying assets which are subsequently inﬂuenced by their interactions.
These changes in portfolio performance provide an attractive headline
index for ecosystem based management, regardless of whether ecosystem
wealth is ultimately included in a broader wealth index (Yun et al.,
2017). In this paper we develop an evaluation approach where key variables, such as biodiversity, hydrology and access (as described throughout
Section 3) are combined and normalised. These values provide metrics, or
headline indicators, which can be used to measure the performance of
part of (e.g., changes in green or blue space hydrological performance) or
the entire (e.g. the urban natural space in the study area) system in relation
to change. These metrics provide a useful indication of system behaviour;
however, our primary goal is a dynamic representation of UNC, improving
our understandings of the trade-offs and opportunities of socio-economic,
built and natural environment change. Creating such a composite indicator,
however, is not trivial, as the reduction from three dimensions to one necessarily involves choices to be made. We based our choices on a list of requirements consistent with our conceptualisation of the headline index;
Natural Space Performance (NSP).
The indicator expresses performance on a scale from 0 (complete absence of any beneﬁt) to 1 (the highest physically possible performance)
and should obey the Anna Karenina principle (Diamond, 1997), where a
value of 1 can only be achieved if performance in each dimension is highest,
while the lowest performance in either dimension (corresponding to a
value 0 of the corresponding indicator) would lead the NSP index of indicator to take on the value 0. A mathematical form which satisﬁes these requirements is a weighted geometric mean of three dimensionless
indicators, each representing one aspect of natural space:

is the mean of proximity, transport, facilities and amenities and physical obstacles which are described in the following sections and in the Appendix 1
section on Natural Space Performance.
3.1.7.1. Proximity. The distance of natural space from the homes of potential
users is a major determinant of use; two thirds of visits to green space in the
UK occur within two miles of the home (Ofﬁce of National Statistics,
Natural England, 2018). For the purposes of this model, we deﬁne proximity as the distance of green space from the home, following the approach
used by Ofﬁce of National Statistics and Public Health England (2020).
This is reﬂected in the model through a user assigned value between 0.1
and 1, representing the average distance from the home to natural space.
Green or blue space located less than 2 min' walk from the home is deemed
excellent and given a value of 1. A value of 0.1 denotes greenspace located a
walk equal or greater than 40 min from the home; the average time it takes
to walk two miles.
3.1.7.2. Transport. Transport infrastructure is an additional variable which
determines the usability of public natural space. Public transport includes
buses and trains, the number of stops and how regular the service is. Private
transport includes parking facilities for cars and bikes, their quality, safety
and cost if relevant. This is captured in the model through a user assigned
value between 0.1 and 1, where 0.1 represents a scenario with little to no
public transport or parking options, and 1 where excellent transport facilities exist.
3.1.7.3. Availability of facilities. Public amenities include the presence of toilets and washroom facilities, cafes, playgrounds and play areas, benches
and seating areas. The presence of particular types of amenities are crucial
to the use of space by certain groups of people and their absence will significantly reduce the likelihood of the space being used. It should also be noted
that the type of amenities within a park are location speciﬁc – public space
design will be different for a green space adjacent to a large city ofﬁce block
than a suburban area with young families with children. The quality of facilities is represented as a value between 0.1 and 1, where 0.1 is public
space with little or no facilities, and 1 is the presence of excellent facilities.
Values are derived by stakeholders and expert guidance.

1

NSP ¼ ðBPαBP  HPαHP  APαAP ÞαBP þαHP þαAP

(4)

Where BP, HP and AP are unit-less and stand for the biodiversity, hydrological and access performance indicators, respectively. Parameter weighting
is represented by α. These indicators are constructed based on requirements
that are similar to those for NSP. For example, an extreme case where there
is an absence of natural space will result in a value of zero with no beneﬁts
provided, while an entire area comprised of the best performing natural
space type will result in a value of 1. Additionally, we require that the contributions of each natural space type be positively correlated with its relative surface area.
These requirements are satisﬁed if we construct each of the indicators as
a ratio of the current state and the best possible state. The numerator of this
ratio is the sum product of the performance of each natural space type and
its surface area (except for biodiversity, for which the area is already included in the metric as expressed in biodiversity units (BU)). The denominator is the product of the total area and the per-unit-area performance of
the natural space type for which it is highest.
These indicators are combined into a composite indicator, NSP. However, there are still two degrees of freedom – the weights α – which rest
upon value judgments that only stakeholders can make, e.g. through determining relative degrees of importance in pairwise comparisons. While we
have included in the model the capacity to consider weighting, the results
we present are obtained from model runs with all weights identical, the implicit choice being that in this application, all three aspects are equally important. The weights can be changed by users of the model according to the
relative importance they attach to the three aspects.

3.1.7.4. Absence of physical obstacles. Physical obstacles to the use of urban
natural space can be natural or manufactured and may include vegetation,
topography, lack of or poorly maintained pathways, limited lighting and
the presence of areas which reduce the safety of potential natural space
users. Values range from 0.1 to 1 where 0.1 is a space with few to no
paths, and/or areas which are inaccessible or unsafe to potential users.
Areas with excellent facilities such as fully accessible seating areas, toilets
and cafes are given a value of up to 1. These input parameters are obtained
through expert guidance and stakeholder consultation, considering the different users of the space; their needs and how physical obstacles may inhibit safe and regular use. This included access for wheelchair users.
These input parameters will vary depending on the case study and are qualitative scores that stakeholders and experts have agreed upon.
3.1.8. Natural Space Performance (NSP)
The assessment of natural resource and ecosystem service sustainability
is critical to system understanding and a key part of evidence generation for
improved decision making. A number of approaches already exist, for example, the UK’s NC Accounts which estimate exchange prices that are directly comparable to GDP. However, whether or not society is on a
sustainable trajectory is best accounted for as the aggregate of all NC assets
(Bateman and Mace, 2020). In order to fully assess the state of humannatural environment interactions it is important to consider both the stocks
of natural assets and the ﬂow of ESS, thereby including resource sustainability in decision making; a factor which can be missed using simple
ﬂow based assessments (Bateman and Mace, 2020). Almost all natural resources are limited in some way; if a decision is made to change the stock
or ﬂow of a natural resource or eco-system service, it can reduce the

4. Model application
The developed model was applied to the Thamesmead Waterfront
Development case study to assess the performance of natural space over a
number of different scenarios. Scenarios were chosen to represent likely environmental and land use trajectories in the coming years to explore the
7

J. O'Keeffe et al.

Science of the Total Environment 824 (2022) 153673

4.2. Results

impact of differing options for the development and the usefulness of the
NC Evaluation framework. The scenarios are plausible alternative permutations of the development plan (Peabody, 2019) designed by the modellers
and validated by urban development experts and stakeholders. Key variables are listed in Table 1.

The results of all scenarios are presented in Fig. 5. Many of the scenario
outputs display results as a series of steps, for example, S3 in the Built Area
plot. This represents the progression of construction through the building
development plan which is scheduled to take part in stages. This information forms part of the model driving data (see Appendix A) and inﬂuences
the rate of change that takes place during the model runs. Where model outputs reach a steady state, this represents the end of the development phase
of the project. Changes in the natural or built environment, including the
impact of maintenance are not considered as no suitable information was
available. The following section describes model outputs by scenario.

4.1. Scenarios
4.1.1. Scenario 1 (S1): approximation of proposed building design (Baseline)
In this scenario, we increase built space area through implementation of
a development, broadly in line with the proposed urban design for the
Thamesmead Waterfront Development plan. For the purposes of this scenario, no changes are made to the natural space parameters, allowing us
to directly explore the impacts of development on NSP.

4.2.1. Scenario 1 (S1): approximation of proposed building design (Baseline)
S1 results in an increase of approximately 19 ha of built space taking
place over 5 construction phases. No other changes occur to the key
model values during the model run. As the area of the development in
this scenario is less than that of the initial Developable Land (see
Section 3.1.3), no reduction in natural space area takes place and it remains
constant at 61 ha. Biodiversity values and hydrological performance also remain at 0.710 and 0.437 respectively, as no change in natural space area or
to the relevant natural space variables are made. Under S1, accessibility and
NSP remain constant at 0.711 at 0.604 respectively throughout the model
run.

4.1.2. Scenario 2 (S2): high density building design
In S2, the development footprint is reduced through implementation of
high-rise buildings. Under this scenario no additional changes are made to
the natural space.
4.1.3. Scenario 3 (S3): low density building design
This scenario explores the model’s ability to investigate the impacts of
urban sprawl on natural space performance. The overall built area footprint
is increased, requiring a signiﬁcant reduction in natural space area. No additional changes are made to the natural space.

4.2.2. Scenario 2 (S2): high density building design
S2 represents a higher density building scenario resulting in 5 ha of built
space – the lowest of all explored potential scenarios. As with S1, the natural space area remains constant at 61 ha throughout the model run as under
these scenarios the building conﬁguration footprint does not lead to a reduction or increase in natural space. As a result, biodiversity values also remain constant at approximately 0.710, as does hydrological performance at
0.437 as no change to the relevant natural space variables are made. Under
S2 accessibility values also remains constant at 0.711. Under S2, the only
change made during the development is to housing design which reduces
the building footprint and does not impact NSP. As a result, NSP remains
constant at 0.604.

4.1.4. Scenario 4 (S4): proposed building design with green roofs
Here we explore how the implementation of green roofs can affect the
overall NSP, providing additional ESS including biodiversity, improved hydrological performance and greater natural space access.
4.1.5. Scenario 5 (S5): the use of Nature Based Solutions to reduce ﬂood risk
S5 examines the role that NBS can play in addressing environmental
challenges, in this case ﬂooding. By changing the rainfall runoff curve number (see Section 3.1.6), which simulates the effect of different vegetation
types (see USDA, 2004), we explore how a reduction in ﬂood risk can be
achieved across the site under temporal variations in precipitation.

4.2.3. Scenario 3 (S3): low density building design
S3 results in the largest development footprint; 39 ha of built space. This
leads to a reduction in natural space, from 61 to 48 ha and the ESS it provides, including biodiversity values, which fall from 0.710 to 0.552.
There is also a reduction in hydrological performance under S3, dropping
from 0.437 to 0.349, due to an increase in impermeable area and a reduction in natural space areas and rainfall runoff retention capacity. Accessibility also falls during S3, from 0.711 to 0.552, due to the replacement of

4.1.6. Scenario 6 (S6): Integrated scenario
A combined implementation of parameters outlined in S4 and S5 are
used in S6 to explore how natural space performance can be improved
through the provision of NBS’s to reduce ﬂood risk, increase biodiversity
and provide additional high quality green space for residents.

Table 1
Key variables used in the model during scenarios. For a full list of variables please see Appendix A.
Variable

S1: Proposed

A: 4 ﬂoors
B: 4 ﬂoors
C: 4 ﬂoors
D: 4 ﬂoors
E: 2 ﬂoors
F: 2 ﬂoors
Green Roof coverage
0%
Vegetation Type Curve Number (Eq. (3)) Grassland: 55
Woodland: 40
Blue Space:
100
Marsh &
Wetland:
95
RUL: 50
Green roofs: 55
Building Designs (see Appx. A2 for
details)

S2: High Rise

S3: Urban
Sprawl

S4: Proposed +
Green Roofs

S5: Proposed + NBS for
Flood
risk reduction

S6: Proposed + Green Roofs & NBS
for
Flood risk reduction

A: 14 ﬂoors
B: 14 ﬂoors
C: 14 ﬂoors
D: 14 ﬂoors
E: 10 ﬂoors
F: 10 ﬂoors
0%
Grassland: 55
Woodland: 40
Blue Space:
100
Marsh &
Wetland:
95
RUL: 50
Green roofs: 55

A: 2 ﬂoors
B: 2 ﬂoors
C: 2 ﬂoors
D: 2 ﬂoors
E: 1 ﬂoor
F: 1 ﬂoor
0%
Grassland: 55
Woodland: 40
Blue Space:
100
Marsh &
Wetland:
95
RUL: 50
Green roofs: 55

A: 4 ﬂoors
B: 4 ﬂoors
C: 4 ﬂoors
D: 4 ﬂoors
E: 2 ﬂoors
F: 2 ﬂoors
90%
Grassland: 55
Woodland: 40
Blue Space:
100
Marsh &
Wetland:
95
RUL: 50
Green roofs: 55

A: 4 ﬂoors
B: 4 ﬂoors
C: 4 ﬂoors
D: 4 ﬂoors
E: 2 ﬂoors
F: 2 ﬂoors
0%
Grassland: 45
Woodland: 40
Blue Space:
100
Marsh & Wetland:

A: 4 ﬂoors
B: 4 ﬂoors
C: 4 ﬂoors
D: 4 ﬂoors
E: 2 ﬂoors
F: 2 ﬂoors
90%
Grassland: 45
Woodland: 40
Blue Space:
100
Marsh & Wetland:

95
RUL: 42
Green roofs: 55

95
RUL: 42
Green roofs: 55

8

J. O'Keeffe et al.

Science of the Total Environment 824 (2022) 153673

Fig. 5. Outputs generated by the model during Scenarios 1–6. Results are presented by key variable. With the exceptions of Built Area and Natural Area which are presented in
hectares (ha), outputs range from 0 to 1 and are dimensionless. Model outputs for some scenarios overlap (e.g. S2 & S5 underly S1 in the Biodiversity results).

space area. Under S5, biodiversity units also remain constant at approximately 0.710 throughout the model run. The building conﬁguration footprint does not lead to a reduction in natural space, however, the
hydrological performance increases during S5 due to the gradual adaption
of natural space to reduce ﬂooding, increasing from 0.437 to 0.533. No
other changes are made which affect hydrology. Natural space accessibility
remains constant at 0.711 in this scenario. NSP values for S5 increase from
0.604 to 0.646. This is slightly higher than S1 and S4 due to the increased
capacity to reduce ﬂood risk.

natural space area with private inaccessible property. The overall NSP during S3 reduces from 0.604 to 0.474.
4.2.4. Scenario 4 (S4): proposed building design with green roofs
With the exception of green roof implementation, the conﬁguration of
building design under S4 is the same as that found in S1. Changes in land
use under this scenario result in approximately 19 ha of built space, however, there is an increase in natural area, from 61.5 to 79.9 ha due to the addition of green roofs on buildings. This is reﬂected in biodiversity values,
which increase from 0.710 to 0.733. The hydrological performance also increases during S4; from 0.437 to 0.472, as the presence of green roofs on
buildings slightly improves the rainfall runoff capacity of the overall site.
Access values during S4 also increase due to the addition of green roofs
on buildings, from 0.711 to 0.799. While the implementation of green
roofs in the construction design increased NSP during S4; from 0.604 to
0.640. It also improves the site's capacity to provide ESS including a reduction in ﬂood risk while offering additional, if limited, access to natural
space.

4.2.6. Scenario 6 (S6): integrated scenario
S6 follows a similar building conﬁguration to S1, S4 and S5 resulting
in approximately 19 ha of built space. The implementation of green
roofs during S6 also sees an increase in natural area from 61.5 to 78.9
ha. This change supports an increase in biodiversity; from 0.710 to
0.733 and is also reﬂected in hydrological performance; increasing
from 0.437 to 0.568 due to both green roof implementation and the
adaptation of natural space to reduce rainfall runoff. Access values
increase during S6 from 0.711 to 0.799. The implementation of green
roofs as part of S6 leads to an increased capacity to provide ESS through
additional natural area, leading to an increase in NSP from 0.604 to
0.693.

4.2.5. Scenario 5 (S5): the use of Nature Based Solutions to reduce ﬂood risk
The S5 building conﬁguration follows the same pattern as S1 and S4, resulting in approximately 19 ha of built space. Natural space area remains
constant at 61 ha throughout the model run as no change is made to natural
9

J. O'Keeffe et al.

Science of the Total Environment 824 (2022) 153673

5. Discussion

and complex scenarios over different spatial and temporal scales, as well
as longer-term planning which may integrate a variety of different designs
at different times. Model parameters can be easily varied, providing an
ideal tool for stakeholder engagement whereby complex socioenvironmental concepts and their impacts can be explored (CampbellArvai and Lindquist, 2021; Ferreira et al., 2020). The model represents a
tool to directly include and operationalise stakeholder priorities. It allows
interested parties to test different environmental scenarios and design conﬁgurations, identifying pathways which address concerns while satisfying
housing needs and helping make ESS knowledge actionable (Brunet et al.,
2018). While the model does not currently include monetary values, outputs can be used to inform development costs by providing information
on the area and type of change. Results are communicated through a series
of metrics, including a headline indicator, creating a clear presentation of
change which combines a number of key indicators. This provides a useful
approach to highlighting where additional interventions can be applied to
improve the natural space performance of the development. By evaluating
the beneﬁts of current or potential NC, its justiﬁcation for inclusion in the
planning process can be derived and demonstrated, increasing the amount
of blue and green space in our cities, improving urban sustainability, and
enhancing quality of life.

This paper explores how SD can improve understanding of the complex
built and natural environment, demonstrating, through a stakeholder informed SD model, its capacity to help planners, designers and developers
reduce negative development impacts while maximising the provision of
ESS from urban NC. A key beneﬁt of using a SD model is its ability to explore the outcomes of a variety of design options, considering interaction
and feedbacks between different key variables over time. Through a series
of scenarios, we use the model to investigate the impacts of high- and lowdensity housing design, the implementation of green roofs and the use of
NBS for ﬂood risk reduction. These scenarios allow us to explore the dynamics of the urban human-natural environment, and how change in one
element of design can propagate throughout the entire system. Despite a
lack of qualitative and quantitative data, this model is well suited to NC
evaluation and urban design, providing useful insights to study area development. This was supported by stakeholders who highlighted the usefulness of the framework, both for system understanding and information
dissemination.
The S4 model outputs which describe the hydrological performance of
the study area show that the addition of green roofs can play a role in the
reduction of ﬂood risk, though less than beneﬁts which could occur by
adaption of green space, through changes in vegetation type and corresponding CN for ﬂood risk reduction (S5). However, focusing on just one
ESS masks additional beneﬁts which are provided. The inclusion of green
roofs creates additional natural space, leading to improvements in biodiversity, and accessibility for residents. Here, the importance of taking a portfolio approach (Yun et al., 2017), where the overall result depends on the
performance of the underlying assets and their interactions, becomes
clear. The NSP of S4 is similar to that of S5, and while S5 beneﬁts are as a
result of targeted changes to improve hydrological performance, improvements in S4 are due to the increase in green space and the corresponding
increases in biodiversity, accessibility and hydrological performance. It
also supports the idea that we should not focus on improving a single ESS
or addressing a single challenge. Without adequate evaluation, NBS are
likely to appear less cost effective than traditional grey infrastructure and
therefore less attractive to developers and planners (Mell et al., 2013).
However, the model and results highlight how NC provides multiple beneﬁts, including reduced ﬂood risk and increased biodiversity, which should
also be considered when designing or adapting urban space.
Globally, urban ﬂooding is a growing problem (Fiori and Volpi, 2020),
exacerbated by an increase in impermeable area which reduces the natural
storage capacity and retention abilities of land to slow the movement of
water to rivers and other water bodies. This is particularly evident during
extreme rainfall events which are becoming more common under climate
change (Li et al., 2020). Flood risk was highlighted as a concern among
stakeholders and in the context of climate change, the ability of the development to deal with more frequent extreme rainfall events is required.
Both S5 and S6 highlight the positive implication of NBS for ﬂood risk reduction, helping balance the impact of development and the increase in impermeable area, as seen in S1 and S3. While developers may have limited
capacity to implement change, the model allows the user to explore how
different portions of land can be adapted to test the beneﬁts of NFM, providing evidence on NBS which can be compared to traditional grey infrastructure. This approach helps highlight the potential operational and cost
effectiveness of nature based solutions to urban challenges (Dick et al.,
2019), helping reduce the strain on traditional drainage infrastructure
while also providing additional beneﬁts.
This paper shows, SD modelling can be used to effectively conceptualise
NC, land use planning decisions and the ESS provided. To date, tools for the
evaluation of NC have tended to look at pre and post build without considering the integrated nature of variability that takes place as urban development progresses (e.g., multi-criteria decision making tool, see Belton and
Stewart, 2002; Mardani et al., 2015) which can assess impacts on multiple
areas of concern but do not consider interactions or temporal changes.
Using a SD approach allows for the consideration of development plans

5.1. Limitations and future work
While this model is designed to explore the dynamic links and feedbacks
between the natural and built environment, and particularly the impacts of
development on the capacity of the natural space to provide ESS, it is, like
all models, an approximation of reality and is not free of biases from experts, stakeholders and modellers. The interactions between all variables
have not been fully accounted for, including those between access and biodiversity, or biodiversity and hydrology. Future versions of the model will
explore these additional links, along with how they interact with socioeconomic variables, including income, ethnicity, age and gender. This
model could be further developed to investigate the role played by blue
and green space in improving physical and mental health – an increasingly
important beneﬁt on which there is limited understanding.
As discussed in previous sections, weighting can be applied to key variables to emphasise their relative importance. Data to inform these variables
is typically obtained through stakeholder discussion. Due to the limited
qualitative and quantitative information available from stakeholders, it
was not deemed appropriate to assign differential weighting to all key variables, however, this can be varied easily within the framework by the user.
This model includes key study area variables as highlighted by stakeholders
and expert opinion. Such data sources have well known limitations (see
Vennix (1999) for further details), yet present a key component in system
understanding and model development. This data has been further supported with information obtained through scientiﬁc literature, published
reports and environmental data sets. The framework is designed, for
those with some SD modelling experience, to be fully adaptable and extensible and has the capacity to be used in collaboration with stakeholders to
explore their priorities, thus facilitating a participatory approach to urban
design which can be applied across a range of settings, and spatial and temporal scales. In addition, during the validation activity, the stakeholders
highlighted the usefulness of the framework, both for system understanding
and information dissemination. Further research is needed to explore potential synergies between SD and other approaches to support decisionmaking, (such as Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis). However, through system understanding and the inclusion of stakeholder highlighted key management components, this framework, allows users to weigh and
prioritise development and management decisions to help achieve critical
socio-environmental targets.
6. Conclusions
In this paper we describe the development and application of a system
dynamics model to quantify and evaluate the impact of urban design on
10

J. O'Keeffe et al.

Science of the Total Environment 824 (2022) 153673
Bradbury, Richard B., Butchart, Stuart H.M., Fisher, Brendan, Hughes, Francine M.R., IngwallKing, Lisa, MacDonald, Michael A., Merriman, Jennifer C., Peh, Kelvin S.H., Pellier, AnneSophie, Thomas, David H.L., Trevelyan, Rosie, Balmford, Andrew, 2021. The economic
consequences of conserving or restoring sites for nature. Nature Sustainability 4,
602–608. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-021-00692-9.
Brunet, Lucas, Tuomisaari, Johanna, Lavorel, Sandra, Crouzat, Emilie, Bierry, Adeline,
Peltola, Taru, Arpin, Isabelle, 2018. Actionable knowledge for land use planning: making
ecosystem services operational. Land Use Policy 72 (April 2017), 27–34.
Calliari, Elisa, Staccione, Andrea, Mysiak, Jaroslav, 2019. An assessment framework for
climate-proof nature-based solutions. Sci. Total Environ. 656, 691–700.
Campbell-Arvai, Victoria, Lindquist, Mark, 2021. From the ground up: using structured community engagement to identify objectives for urban green infrastructure planning. Urban
For. Urban Green. 59 (August 2020).
Cherry, B., Pevsner, N., 1983. The Buildings of England. South. Penguin Books,
Harmondsworth, London 2.
Cohen-Sacham, E., Walters, G., Janzen, C., Maginnis, S., 2016. Nature-based Solutions to Address Global Societal Challenges.
Coletta, Virginia Rosa, Pagano, Alessandro, Pluchinotta, Irene, Fratino, Umberto, Scrieciu,
Albert, Nanu, Florentina, Giordano, Raffaele, 2020. Causal loop diagrams for supporting
nature based solutions participatory design and performance assessment. J. Environ.
Manag. (xxxx), 111668.
<collab>Coalition, Natural Capitalcollab, 2016. Natural Capital Protocol.
Costanza, Robert, de Groot, Rudolf, Sutton, Paul, van der Ploeg, Sander, Anderson, Sharolyn
J., Kubiszewski, Id.a., Farber, Stephen, Kerry Turner, R., 2014. Changes in the global
value of ecosystem services. Glob. Environ. Chang. 26 (1), 152–158.
Dasgupta, P., 2021. The Economics of Biodiversity: The Dasgupta Review. London.
Department for Environment Food and Rural Affairs, 2020. Enabling a Natural Capital Approach (ENCA).
Deshmukh, Dhananjay Suresh, Chaube, Umesh Chandra, Hailu, Ambaye Ekube, Gudeta, Dida
Aberra, Kassa, Melaku Tegene, 2013. Estimation and comparision of curve numbers
based on dynamic land use land cover change, observed rainfall-runoff data and land
slope. J. Hydrol. 492, 89–101.
Diamond, Jared, 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel. 1st ed. W. W. Norton & Company, New York.
Dick, Jan, Miller, James D., Carruthers-Jones, Jonathan, Dobel, Anne J., Carver, Steve,
Garbutt, Angus, Hester, Alison, Hails, Rosie, Magreehan, Victoria, Quinn, Melina, 2019.
How are nature based solutions contributing to priority societal challenges surrounding
human well-being in the United Kingdom: a systematic map protocol. Environ. Evid. 8
(1), 1–11.
Eker, Sibel, Zimmermann, Nici, Carnohan, Shane, Davies, Mike, 2018. Participatory system
dynamics modelling for housing, energy and wellbeing interactions. Build. Res. Inf. 46
(7), 738–754.
European Commission, 2019. Guidance on a Strategic Framework for Further Supporting the
Deployment of EU-level Green and Blue Infrastructure. Brussels.
European Commission (EC), 2015. Towards an EU Research and Innovation Policyagenda for
Nature Based Solutions and Re-Naturingcities. Final Report of the Horizon 2020 Expert
Group on‘Nature-Based Solutions and Re-Naturing Cities. Brussels.
Ferreira, Vera, Barreira, Ana Paula, Loures, Luís, Antunes, Dulce, Panagopoulos, Thomas,
2020. Stakeholders’ engagement on nature-based solutions: a systematic literature review. Sustainability (Switzerland) 12 (2), 1–27.
Fiori, A., Volpi, E., 2020. On the effectiveness of LID infrastructures for the attenuation of
urban ﬂooding at the catchment scale. Water Resour. Res. 56 (5), 1–17.
Fisher, Brendan, Kerry Turner, R., Morling, Paul, 2009. Deﬁning and classifying ecosystem
services for decision making. Ecol. Econ. 68 (3), 643–653.
Fisher, Dan, Blackstock, Kirsty, Irvine, Katherine, 2020. ‘It’s on the “nice to have” pile’: potential principles to improve the implementation of socially inclusive green infrastructure.
Ambio 50, 1574–1586. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13280-020-01372-2.
Ford, Pauline, Baikie, Ken, 2018. Thamesmead: kickstarting the transformation of a stalled
new town. Geography 103 (2), 102–104.
Frantzeskaki, Niki, 2019. Seven lessons for planning nature-based solutions in cities. Environ.
Sci. Policy 93 (January), 101–111.
Gascon, Mireia, Triguero-Mas, Margarita, Martínez, David, Dadvand, Payam, Rojas-Rueda,
David, Plasència, Antoni, Nieuwenhuijsen, Mark J., 2016. Residential green spaces and
mortality: a systematic review. Environ. Int. 86, 60–67.
Giordano, R., Pluchinotta, I., Pagano, A., Scrieciu, A., Nanu, F., 2019. Enhancing Nature-based
Solutions Acceptance through Stakeholders’ Engagement in Co-beneﬁts Identiﬁcation
and Trade-offs Analysis. 1.
Gokhelashvili, Nino, 2015. The role of the public in environmental decision-making. Am.
J. Environ. Protect. 4 (3), 1.
Guerry, Anne D., Polasky, Stephen, Lubchenco, Jane, Chaplin-Kramer, Rebecca, Daily,
Gretchen C., Grifﬁn, Robert, Ruckelshaus, Mary, Bateman, Ian J., Duraiappah, Anantha,
Elmqvist, Thomas, Feldman, Marcus W., Folke, Carl, Hoekstra, Jon, Kareiva, Peter M.,
Keeler, Bonnie L., Li, Shuzhuo, McKenzie, Emily, Ouyang, Zhiyun, Reyers, Belinda,
Ricketts, Taylor H., Rockström, Johan, Tallis, Heather, Vira, Bhaskar, 2015. Natural capital and ecosystem services informing decisions: from promise to practice. 112 (24),
7348–7355.
Gutman, Pablo, 2007. Ecosystem services: foundations for a new rural-urban compact. Ecol.
Econ. 62 (3–4), 383–387.
Haase, Dagmar, Larondelle, Neele, Andersson, Erik, Artmann, Martina, Borgström, Sara,
Breuste, Jürgen, Gomez-Baggethun, Erik, Gren, Åsa, Hamstead, Zoé, Hansen, Rieke,
Kabisch, Nadja, Kremer, Peleg, Langemeyer, Johannes, Rall, Emily Lorance,
McPhearson, Timon, Pauleit, Stephan, Qureshi, Salman, Schwarz, Nina, Voigt, Annette,
Wurster, Daniel, Elmqvist, Thomas, 2014. A quantitative review of urban ecosystem service assessments: concepts, models, and implementation. Ambio 43 (4), 413–433.
Hall, Jim W., Henriques, Justin J., Hickford, Adrian J., Nicholls, Robert J., 2013. Systems-ofsystems analysis of national infrastructure. Proc. Inst. Civ. Eng. Eng. Sustain. 166 (5),
249–257.

the multiple beneﬁts and co-beneﬁts provided by UNC and associated ecosystem services. This model provides a tool to help address a signiﬁcant gap
in practice, policy and research by spatially and temporally integrating the
human, built and natural environment systems where key links and feedbacks are considered and represented. We have demonstrated that using a
SD approach enables a more holistic ESS assessment, evaluating NC performance and allowing differing scenarios for development to be explored simultaneously. Through taking a whole system approach, this model helps
identify the negative impacts of development while allowing the user to
propose and assess alternative solutions. Stakeholder feedback on the
framework emphasised its usefulness in triggering discussion and informing decision making. We introduce a Natural Space Performance metric;
a composite of the performance outputs of key variables represented in a
single headline indicator showing the propagation of change. We apply
the framework to a London case study, comparing different plausible alternative permutations of the development plan. Model outputs highlight
where potential improvements could be made, leading to increased green
space and a reduction in ﬂood risk. This framework helps articulate and explore the many interconnected effects of development on NC over time,
allowing users to weigh and prioritise decisions, helping achieve socioenvironmental targets while addressing housing and natural environment
requirements.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.153673.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
O'Keeffe: Conceptualisation, Methodology, Model Development, Model
application and Results analysis, Writing. Pluchinotta: Conceptualisation,
Methodology, Model Development, Writing. De Stercke: Model Development, Reviewing and Editing. Hinson: Reviewing and Editing: PucholSalort: Visualisation, Reviewing and Editing: Mijic: Reviewing and Editing,
Zimmermann: Conceptualisation, Methodology, Model Development, Collins: Conceptualisation, Methodology, Model Development, Results analysis, Writing.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the
work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
The research activity described in this paper was funded by the UK
Natural Environment Research Council (“Community Water Management
for a Liveable London” CAMELLIA project, ref. no. NE/S003495/1) and
the Wellcome Trust (“Complex Urban Systems for Sustainability and
Health” CUSSH project, ref. no. 209387/Z/17/Z). For the purpose of Open
Access, the author has applied a CC BY public copyright licence to any
Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission.
References
Askew, Phil, 2018. Creating value for people in thamesmead - well being and green infrastructure. Valuing Landscape Conference.
Bateman, Ian J., Mace, Georgina M., 2020. The natural capital framework for sustainably efﬁcient and equitable decision making. Nature Sustainability 3, 776–783. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41893-020-0552-3.
Beierle, Thomas C., 2002. The quality of stakeholder-based decisions. Risk Anal. 22 (4),
739–749.
Belton, Valerie, Stewart, Theodor, 2002. Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis: An Integrated
Approach. Springer Science & Business Media.
van den Berg, Magdalena, Wendel-Vos, Wanda, van Poppel, Mireille, Kemper, Han, van
Mechelen, Willem, Maas, Jolanda, 2015. Health beneﬁts of green spaces in the living environment: a systematic review of epidemiological studies. Urban For. Urban Green. 14
(4), 806–816.
Bettencourt, Luis, West, Geoffrey, 2010. A uniﬁed theory of urban living. Nature 467 (7318),
912–913.

11

J. O'Keeffe et al.

Science of the Total Environment 824 (2022) 153673
Pagano, Alessandro, Pluchinotta, Irene, Pengal, Polona, Cokan, Blaž, Giordano, Raffaele,
2019. Engaging stakeholders in the assessment of NBS effectiveness in ﬂood risk reduction: a participatory system dynamics model for beneﬁts and co-beneﬁts evaluation.
Sci. Total Environ. 690, 543–555.
Peabody, 2019. Peabody’s Plan for Thamesmead 2018 - 2023. London.
Pluchinotta, Irene, Kazakçi, Akin O., Giordano, Raffaele, Tsoukiàs, Alexis, 2019. Design theory for generating alternatives in public decision making processes. Group Decis.
Negot. 28 (2), 341–375.
Pluchinotta, Irene, Pagano, Alessandro, Vilcan, Tudorel, Ahilan, Sangaralingam, Kapetas,
Leon, Maskrey, Shaun, Krivtsov, Vladimir, Thorne, Colin, O’Donnell, Emily, 2021a. A participatory system dynamics model to investigate sustainable urban water management in
Ebbsﬂeet Garden City. Sustain. Cities Soc. 67 (April 2020) (March 2018).
Pluchinotta, Irene, Salvia, Giuseppe, Zimmermann, Nici, 2021b. The importance of eliciting
stakeholders’ system boundary perceptions for problem structuring and decisionmaking. Eur. J. Oper. Res. (xxxx).
Puchol-Salort, Pepe, O’Keeffe, Jimmy, van Reeuwijk, Maarten, Mijic, Ana, 2021. An urban
planning sustainability framework: systems approach to blue green urban design. Sustain.
Cities Soc. 66 (October 2020), 66.
Raymond, Christopher M., Pam, Berry, Breil, Margaretha, Nita, Mihai R., Kabisch, Nadja, de
Bel, Mark, Enzi, Vera, Frantzeskaki, Niki, Geneletti, Davide, Cardinaletti, Marco,
Lovinger, Leor, Basnou, Corina, Monteiro, Ana, Robrecht, Holger, Sgrigna, Gregorio,
Munari, Laura, Calfapietra, Carlo, 2017. An Impact Evaluation Framework to Support
Planning and Evaluation of Nature-Based Solutions Projects.
Reed, Mark S., Graves, Anil, Dandy, Norman, Posthumus, Helena, Hubacek, Klaus, Morris,
Joe, Prell, Christina, Quinn, Claire H., Stringer, Lindsay C., 2009. Who’s in and why? A
typology of stakeholder analysis methods for natural resource management. J. Environ.
Manag. 90 (5), 1933–1949.
Seddon, Nathalie, Chausson, Alexandre, Berry, Pam, Girardin, Cécile A.J., Smith, Alison,
Turner, Beth, 2020. Understanding the value and limits of nature-based solutions to climate change and other global challenges. Philos. Trans. R. Soc., B 375 (1794).
Seppelt, Ralf, Dormann, Carsten F., Eppink, Florian V., Lautenbach, Sven, Schmidt, Stefan,
2011. A quantitative review of ecosystem service studies: approaches, shortcomings
and the road ahead. J. Appl. Ecol. 48 (3), 630–636.
Sterman, J.D., 2000. Systems thinking and modeling for a complex world. McGraw-Hill, New
York.
UN, 1992. United Nations Conference on Environment and Development: Agenda 21. Rio de
Janerio, Brazil.
UNECE, 1998. Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision Making
and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters. Aarhus, Denmark.
United Nations, 2018. World Urbanization Prospects 2018.
USDA, 2004. Hydrologic Soil-cover Complexes Part 630 Hydrology National Engineering
Handbook Chapter 9. Retrieved January 20, 2021.
Van Mullem, J.A., 1989. Runoff and peak discharges using green-ampt inﬁltration model.
J. Hydrol. Eng. 117 (3).
Vennix, Jac A.M., 1999. Group model-building: tackling messy problems. Syst. Dyn. Rev. 15
(4), 379–401.
Vennix, Jac A.M., Akkermans, Henk A., Rouwette, Etiënne A.J.A., 1996. Group modelbuilding to facilitate organizational change: an exploratory study. Syst. Dyn. Rev. 12
(1), 39–58.
Vivid Economics, 2018. 30-year green infrastructure strategy for Thamesmead. Commissioned by Peabody and Landscape and Green Infrastructure Strategy for Thamesmead.
Vivid Economics.
Whitford, V., Ennos, A.R., Handley, J.F., 2001. ‘City form and natural process’ - indicators for
the ecological performance of urban areas and their application to Merseyside, UK.
Landsc. Urban Plan. 57 (2), 91–103.
Whyte, Jennifer, Mijic, Ana, Myers, Rupert J., Angeloudis, Panagiotis, Cardin, Michel
Alexandre, Stettler, Marc E.J., Ochieng, Washington, 2020. A research agenda on systems
approaches to infrastructure. Civ. Eng. Environ. Syst. 37 (4), 214–233.
Yun, Seong Do, Hutniczak, Barbara, Abbott, Joshua K., Fenichel, Eli P., 2017. Ecosystembased management and the wealth of ecosystems. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 114
(25), 6539–6544.

Hamel, P., Guerry, A.D., Polasky, S., Han, B., Douglass, J.A., Hamann, M., Janke, B., Kuiper,
J.J., Levrel, H., Liu, H., Lonsdorf, E., McDonald, R.I., Nootenboom, C., Ouyang, Z.,
Remme, R.P., Sharp, R.P., Tardieu, L., Viguié, V., Xu, D., Zheng, H., Daily, G.C., 2021.
Mapping the beneﬁts of nature in cities with the InVEST software. Npj Urban Sustain. 1
(1).
Holzinger, O., Sadler, J., Scott, A., Grayson, N., Marsh, A., 2019. NCPT – managing environmental gains and losses. 2019. “NCPT - mainstreaming green infrastructure in the planning system”. Town and Country Planning 88 (5), 149–150.
Horton, Bruce, Digman, Christopher, Ashley, Richard, McMullan, Jordan, 2019. W047b B£ST
Guidance - Guidance to Assess the Beneﬁts of Blue and Green Infrastructure Using B£ST.
Jansson, Åsa, 2013. Reaching for a sustainable, resilient urban future using the lens of ecosystem services. Ecol. Econ. 86, 285–291.
Jerome, Gemma, Sinnett, Danielle, Burgess, Sarah, Calvert, Thomas, Mortlock, Roger, 2019. A
framework for assessing the quality of green infrastructure in the built environment in the
UK. 40 (October 2018), 174–182.
Klain, Sarah C., Chan, Kai M.A., 2012. Navigating coastal values: participatory mapping of
ecosystem services for spatial planning. Ecol. Econ. 82, 104–113.
Li, Yafei, Fowler, Hayley J., Argüeso, Daniel, Blenkinsop, Stephen, Evans, Jason P., Lenderink,
Geert, Yan, Xiaodong, Guerreiro, Selma B., Lewis, Elizabeth, Li, Xiao Feng, 2020. Strong
intensiﬁcation of hourly rainfall extremes by urbanization. Geophys. Res. Lett. 47 (14),
1–8.
Luederitz, Christopher, Brink, Ebba, Gralla, Fabienne, Hermelingmeier, Verena, Meyer,
Moritz, Niven, Lisa, Panzer, Lars, Partelow, Stefan, Rau, Anna Lena, Sasaki, Ryuei,
Abson, David J., Lang, Daniel J., Wamsler, Christine, von Wehrden, Henrik, 2015. A review of urban ecosystem services: six key challenges for future research. Ecosyst. Serv.
14, 98–112.
Mardani, Abbas, Jusoh, Ahmad, Nor, Khalil M.D., Khalifah, Zainab, Zakwan, Norhayati,
Valipour, Alireza, 2015. Multiple criteria decision-making techniques and their applications - a review of the literature from 2000 to 2014. Econ. Res. 28 (1), 516–571.
Martín, Gómez, Eulalia, Raffaele Giordano, Pagano, Alessandro, van der Keur, Peter, Costa,
María Máñez, 2020. Using a system thinking approach to assess the contribution of nature based solutions to sustainable development goals. Sci. Total Environ. 738. Sci.
Total Environ.738.
Matthews, Tony, Lo, Alex Y., Byrne, Jason A., 2015. Reconceptualizing green infrastructure
for climate change adaptation: barriers to adoption and drivers for uptake by spatial planners. Landsc. Urban Plan. 138, 155–163.
Mayor of London, 2020. London Green Spaces Commission Report. London.
McGranahan, G., Marcotullio, P., Bai, X., Balk, D., Braga, T., Douglas, I., Elmqvist, T., Rees, W.,
Satterthwaite, D., Songsore, J., Zlotnik, H., 2005. Urban systems. Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment. Ecosystems and Human Well-being: Current State and Trends. Island Press,
Washington DC, pp. 795–825.
Meadows, D.H., Wright, D., 2008. Thinking in Systems: A Primer. Chelsea Green Publishing,
Vermont.
Mell, Ian C., Henneberry, John, Hehl-Lange, Sigrid, Keskin, Berna, 2013. Promoting urban
greening: valuing the development of green infrastructure investments in the urban
core of Manchester, UK. Urban For. Urban Green. 12 (3), 296–306.
Natural England, 2018. Monitor of Engagement with the Natural Environment. The National
Survey on People and the Natural Environment, pp. 1–20 (March 2018).
Natural EnglandCrosher, Ian, Gold, Susannah, Heaver, Max, Heydon, Matt, Moore, Lauren,
Panks, Stephen, Scott, Sarah, Stone, Dave, White, Nick, 2019. The Biodiversity Metric
2.0: Auditing and Accounting for Biodiversity Value. User Guide (Beta Version, July
2019).
Notte, La., Alessandra, Dalia D.Amato, Mäkinen, Hanna, Paracchini, Maria Luisa, Liquete,
Camino, Egoh, Benis, Geneletti, Davide, Crossman, Neville D., 2017. Ecosystem services
classiﬁcation: a systems ecology perspective of the Cascade framework. Ecol. Indic. 74,
392–402.
Ofﬁce for National Statistics, 2019. Urban Green Spaces Raise Nearby House Prices by an Average of £2,500 - Ofﬁce for National Statistics. Retrieved January 20, 2021Ofﬁce of National Statistics. https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/environmentalaccounts/articles/
urbangreenspacesraisenearbyhousepricesbyanaverageof2500/2019-10-14.
Ofﬁce of National Statistics and Public Health England, 2020. Improving Access to
Greenspace. A New Review for 2020.
Ostanello, A., Tsoukiàs, A., 1993. An explicative model of ‘public’ interorganizational interactions. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 70, 67–82.

12

