Alexandria Engineering Journal 95 (2024) 114–131

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Alexandria Engineering Journal
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/aej

Observing the dynamics of urban growth of Al-Baha City using
GIS (2006–2021)
Abdulaziz Alzahrani *, Naief Aldossary, Jamal Alghamdi
Architectural Department, College of Engineering, Al-Baha University, Al-Baha, Saudi Arabia

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Urban growth
Urban expansion
Land use
Land cover change
GIS

This study observes and records land cover changes in Al-Baha to track urban growth. The study develops a
schematic vision of urban mass’s current and future shape and distribution and its growth to achieve sustainable
urban development, reduce service and social differences between city areas, and integrate urban and rural
areas. The study uses inductive methods to monitor urban developments, population growth, and land use
through Al-Baha’s structural schemes by extracting digital data from satellite imagery to survey historical land
cover changes. The mapping software ArcGIS v10.8 processed these digital data and the final map compositions.
Through this urban mass study, the research predicted city growth and development. Capabilities and functions
must shape urban and rural-urban communities. The development must also consider the National Urban
Development Strategy, the relative importance of rural-urban communities, and their expected functional role in
influencing the development of small rural communities adjacent to them to reduce migration from rural areas
near the city. The study highlighted changes in city land coverage. Al-Baha expanded from 1982 to 1995. AlBaha’s transformation from village to city accelerated, increasing its area from 31 km2 to 44 km2. Many villages
beyond 40 were included in the decisions. From 2006–2021, the city’s area grew 221%. It increased from 60 km2
to 133 km2 in an urban area, indicating false urban growth. The study stressed the importance of geographic
information systems (GIS) and remote sensing (RS). The study recommends urban development in suitable areas
because agricultural development is not feasible, especially in the northeast. Land use changes should be pre­
vented by planning regulations because these agricultural areas are essential. Helping urban development move
away from agricultural areas, especially on the eastern axis, is crucial. Create new urban centers along Al-Baha’s
western cliff to attract residents and relieve pressure. Limited linear expansion, especially in the northeast, and
more expansive urbanization are also significant. Maps should also show when the Al-Baha region’s expan­
sionary scope changed and the urban boundaries that had to be reached by a specific time while development
plans were efficiently monitored.

1. Introduction
A city is perceived as a social, economic, political, cultural, and
urban component that effectively develops and prospers in a specific
spatial space while working and interconnecting uniquely to distinguish
one city from another [1]. Al-Baha witnessed during the previous de­
cades urban expansion, urban growth, and economic and social growth
in all sectors [2]. The government institutes in Saudi Arabia were keen to
establish development projects and expand urban development pro­
grams such as land grants and financing loans from the fund real estate
development [3]. The government is given the modernity of municipal
lands’ control and management system as many citizens sought to

disregard agricultural lands with large areas that exceed their actual
needs and prove their ownership [4]. This research was concerned with
studying the dynamics of urban growth of the city during the previous
periods. Therefore, the research problem lies in the need to study and
monitor urban growth and analyze the negative effects of horizontal
urban expansion. The motivating factors and the determinants of urban
growth are represented in the hills and mountainous areas of the city.
The regional plan for the Al-Baha region, where the criteria used to
classify villages and rural communities according to their relative
importance in their region, were studied. The relative weights of each of
these criteria were determined in proportion to the relative importance
of rural communities. The structure of the system of rural-urban

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: azahran@bu.edu.sa (A. Alzahrani).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aej.2024.03.096
Received 1 July 2023; Received in revised form 30 December 2023; Accepted 23 March 2024
Available online 3 April 2024
1110-0168/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier BV on behalf of Faculty of Engineering, Alexandria University This is an open access article under the CC
BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

A. Alzahrani et al.

Alexandria Engineering Journal 95 (2024) 114–131

communities and their classification and setting standards for relative
weight for classifying villages in Al-Baha were analyzed and categorized
into three categories (civilized villages - moderately urbanized villages,
less urbanized villages).
Al-Baha is considered one of the cities in Saudi Arabia that, along
with other cities, has been negatively impacted by the expansion of
urban growth that is excessively damaging to the environment. Since AlBaha contains agricultural components and natural cover, there is
randomness in the land use, which requires accurate and precise
knowledge and monitoring of this growth. The development of a large
number of farmlands into residential areas has been a source of concern
in recent times. This is in addition to the fact that the responsibilities of
government agencies concerned with controlling the growth and urban
sprawl on agricultural lands in the region overlap with one another.
Urban sprawl is considered a significant threat to the forests and green
areas, as well as to the tourist nature of these areas, because the region
naturally extends in both directions, north and south. Furthermore,
increased land encroachment in large areas exceeds the actual need,
which is another factor to be concerned about.
The increased land encroachment was in addition to the rise in
housing loans that occurred during previous periods, contributing to the
housing area’s expansion. Additionally, the modernization of land
control and management systems contributed. This study aims to pro­
vide a clear picture by tracking and monitoring urban growth from the
year 2006–2021, primarily because there is a lack of a clear strategy for
the region that governs urban growth in a way that ensures the inte­
gration of other services, enhances development, and increases the
concerted efforts of all parties to achieve balanced growth. The unbal­
anced urban growth is because the region has not yet developed a
strategy that governs it in a way that ensures the integration of other
services. In the future, it may be challenging to deal with urban devel­
opment logically, and it may also be financially costly due to urban
development being characterized by its rapid dynamism. Furthermore,
the study intends to provide some recommendations that will contribute
to activating this urban expansion without causing any harm to the
natural resources situated within the city.
The research aims to analyze the stages of urban growth in the city of
Al-Baha. The study attempts to monitor the urban mass of Al-Baha in
2006, the urban mass of the city of Al-Baha in 2021, and the motivating
factors for urban growth that are specific to it. The research also seeks to
develop recommendations to control urban development and expansion.
The discussion of urban mass and growth of Al-Baha between 2006 and
2021 is considered the central pillar of the study. The importance of the
study lies in discussing the phenomenon of urban growth, which
threatens the future of the natural environment in the city of Al-Baha.
This research must support and make decisions for decision-makers in
the city to identify the reality of urban growth and its development over
time, to reduce the undesirable effects of random and irregular urban
sprawl.
In the previous years, significant developments in Al-Baha have
accelerated urban changes, which created the need for this study.
Accordingly, the present study sought to observe the nature of the dy­
namic urban changes occurring in Al-Baha by determining a geographic
information system that is based on analyzing and deducing satellite
imagery data to achieve the following objectives:

The study pursued answers to the following questions to achieve
these objectives:
1. What are the significant changes in the urban morphology of Al-Baha
throughout the period between 2006 and 2021?
2. Does any land cover distribution variance occur in Al-Baha between
2006 and 2021?
3. What are the contributing factors to the urban changes and land
cover changes in Al-Baha from 2006–2021?
The importance of this study is toward maximizing the need for
developmental or planning decision-makers to rely on the spatial tech­
nologies embedded in GIS and remote sensing in obtaining, cataloging,
and analyzing any piece of information. Furthermore, the study aims to
save time and effort and ensure speed and accuracy in providing data so
that an urban planning decision is reality-based and built on solid
foundations, especially in the case of Al-Baha, which require constant
information updates and changes follow-up.
2. Literature review
2.1. City urban growth and its relation to GIS
At all levels of civilization, urbanization is slowly but surely
becoming a worldwide issue. Rapid urbanization occurs in all countries,
whether they are developing, developed, or destitute. Urban sprawl
could be a way to shift from traditional rural to modern developed
economies. Urban planning is one of the most common applications of
GIS. GIS applications are relevant in all stages, divisions, industries, and
urban planning responsibilities. For example, GIS technology is used in
urban city expansion to provide city planners with improved informa­
tion transparency, assess viability projects, and predict environmental
impact.
Information is a critical part of city planning and growth. Data from
several sources can be stored, managed, and accessed more easily with
Desktop GIS. In addition, it provides the same benefit while making it
accessible from any device. GIS makes everything very straightforward
and easy [5]. The potential of GIS to construct potential urban devel­
opment scenarios is one of the benefits of employing technology in site
appropriateness studies [6]. A practical option in the context of GIS is a
spatial or GIS-based procedure for determining the acceptability of a
specific area for one particular use. El Garouani et al. (2017) explain an
ecological design and policy concept that encourages interconnecting
open areas, a multi-modal transport network, and mixed-use construc­
tion guided by GIS in urban development. GIS can analyze the real world
by layering content and integrating it with its physical position [7]. It
can define the population in multi-scale, three spatial dimensions, using
a characteristic table detailed description [8]. The Geographic Infor­
mation System (GIS) is both a repository and an instrument for urban
planning. The geo-relational paradigm can collect and connect
geographical and literary data in a database-oriented GIS [9]. In
providing detailed information, GIS allows planners to be decisive in
planning. The essential sources for geographic information system maps.
When employed in a GIS system, remote sensing techniques provide the
most up-to-date and detailed estimates. In addition, the non-spatial data
associated with it is beneficial to urban planners and decision-makers
[10]. Information is essential in assessing projects. GIS aids in the
management of such databases, which can then be used to advise en­
terprises on the effectiveness of collection materials, allocation of bio­
energy advantages, and cost-benefit analysis.
Further, assessing the project’s success is a significant consideration
for urban planners to reduce wasting time and resources. To record and
analyze the dynamics of urban growth, remote sensing (RS) provides
spatial data that may be merged with GIS to create integrated
geographic information. When used in conjunction with a GIS, RS can be
used to quickly examine the effects of geographical features on urban

– Monitoring and recording urban change features in Al-Baha through
undertaking a comparative study of the following elements in
consecutive periods via Urban expansion and its patterns and the
inconsistency of land covers distributions in the Al-Baha.
– Distinguishing the contributing factors to urban land covers
development.
– Producing modern digital maps that track changes in urban land
cover.
– Witnessing the inconsistency in the land covers distributions in AlBaha during the study period.
115

A. Alzahrani et al.

Alexandria Engineering Journal 95 (2024) 114–131

sprawl [11]. Remote sensing combined with GIS technology has been
shown to produce scientifically valid conclusions and policy suggestions
that have aided choice and planners in advancing sustainability,
particularly in rapidly increasing urban areas [12]. GIS enables the
overlay of various data perceptibly and communicably to multiple
stakeholders. As a result, GIS effectively combines, represents, and dis­
tributes data to drive the Urban Green Space planning and imple­
mentation [13]. Alazzawi (2020) explains that measuring GIS
productivity is critical to the organization’s overall GIS success [14]. It
also greatly aids in the processes of organizational change and strategic
planning. GIS has a broad array of applications in structural engineering,
including geographic solutions [15]. Karimi et al. (2018) explain that
transportation, aquatic ecosystems, building maintenance, urban plan­
ning, architecture, and E-business are just a few examples [16].
Furthermore, Khwarahm (2021) suggests that GIS is utilized to
visualize the geographical state of a construction area. Apart from
assessing the viability of city projects, GIS has implications for the
environment [17]. Academics and civil society organizations have used
GIS and RS to analyze the impacts of mineral extraction for various
reasons outside of the mining sector [18]. These include local
socio-economic and ecological risk assessments, regional accumulated
and strategic effect assessments, and industry-wide land-use trends
analyses.
Urban planning considers the environment. In the last 10–20 years,
civil society groups have used GIS, RS, and visualization to evaluate the
past, present, and current environment [18] GIS-based sustainable
development evaluations are more accurate. A visual representation will
help implement a pollution-reduction strategy and achieve environ­
mental sustainability [19]. GIS and GPS are often used to model
mining-induced risks and environmental effects [20]. Used technologies
include mine development, operation, and environmental conservation
[21]. GIS has been used to enable ecological models such soil degrada­
tion, land use, hydrological water quality, contaminants, and water­
sheds [22]. City planners prioritize conservation. Construction
enterprises and ecologists can utilize GIS to measure and compare
renewable resources [23]. Creating a geographical distribution and ar­
ranging new project locations helps city planners minimize sprawl and
ensure social and ecosystem sustainability [24]. GIS and remotely
sensed data technologies help manage solid waste from generation to
disposal [25]. GIS techniques are vital for regulating urban expansion
and its impact on ecosystems.

conversion, natural-to-engineered land cover conversion, and noncontiguous land use [32]. GIS variables suitable land use/land cover
analytical methodologies, modeling tools made possible by GIS, and
land-use preparations to evaluate inland changes with cheap cost, less
time, and greater accuracy [33]. Directly measure, evaluate, and
determine the reason for the urban environment’s shift in land use and
distribution mapping to establish effective plans and tactics for practical
and efficient land use management [34]. Spatial processes, geographical
models, and sophisticated GIS approaches are utilized to investigate
landslide susceptibility patterns, distributions, and orientations and es­
timate land-use change [35]. GIS and environmental monitoring are
widely employed [36]. Through GIS data analysis, land use/land cover
and urban expansion have been recovered[37]. Geographic data can
reduce time when gathering land use and climatic factors when com­
bined with remotely sensed data.
Urbanization often causes negative land use/land cover changes
(LULC). LULC change is a major component of global environmental
change, especially in arid and semi-arid nations with scarce land and
water [38]. Saudi Arabia has changed dramatically in 30 years due to
petrochemical industry growth and population growth [39]. GIS envi­
ronment approaches are essential for quantitatively and spatially
analyzing human impact [40]. GIS can be used as a strategic manage­
ment tool to develop and operate, revolutionize environmental science
processes, and aid environmentally conscious decisions [36]. Urbani­
zation, industrialization, and intensive farming have altered land cover,
affecting the environment and biodiversity. [41]. Geographic informa­
tion systems (GIS) allow for the accurate measurement of different types
of LULC, the provision of precise and comprehensive information on
present and historical land cover, and the analysis of these changes, as
well as the revelation of geographic patterns of urban-suburban devel­
opment at various times [42]. GIS technologies are combined with other
approaches to determine the relevance of criteria and weight elements
to improve land suitability analysis.
A region’s land use/land cover pattern is influenced by natural, so­
cioeconomic, and human factors over time and space. In four MENA
cities with different sizes and growth dynamics, a study was done to
quantify patterns of urban expansion and its effects on agricultural land
from the 1970 s to 2018. The study used remote sensing data to show the
landscape transformation processes in various cities over the last 50
years. The findings indicate that peri-urban green areas have shrunk or
shifted due to increased expansion of built-up areas [43].
Land use is a key concern for city and national architects and envi­
ronmentalists when designing sustainable economic growth. Land-use
and land-cover change (LUCC) remote sensing research has a long his­
tory and has advanced significantly [29]. GIS and remote sensing pro­
vide a cost-effective and precise way to study landscape changes. GIS
and Remote Sensing are land-based, so they help create, execute, and
assess urban development strategies for long-term sustainability[11].
LULC measures ecosystem health and quality of life. Environmentalists
can use frequent edge detection to monitor and assess environmental
challenges [31]. LULC dynamics change spatially and temporally due to
natural and anthropogenic causes. Remote sensing photos can easily
capture land use conditions and provide a data source for current LULC
information and changes [30]. Remote sensing is used to monitor land
use at various scales. Change detection involves collecting, storing,
displaying, and evaluating digital data [34]. LULC changes and urban
expansion rates have been exceptional in recent decades due to
rural-urban migration and improving economic conditions. Consider
urbanization drivers and urban planning improvements.
Rich and poor countries use GIS for planning. Many planning orga­
nizations have switched from mapping software to GIS. GIS technology
helps city planners with information transparency, development
viability assessment, and environmental effect prediction. GIS integra­
tion with planning models, visualization, and the Internet will improve
urban planning. Rapid urban/built-up expansions caused abrupt re­
ductions in farmland, fallow, and unoccupied land. To mitigate

2.2. Urbanization and land use and land cover (LULC)
The land is a significant resource in urban growth and planning, thus
considering deploying advanced technologies in planning. Land Use and
Land Cover (LULC) modification, transitioning, and Landscape Risk (LR)
assessment in earthquake-affected locations are critical for planning and
urban resilience (Nath & Singh, 2018). In a user-friendly approach, the
GIS allows the reader to view and analyze data to understand better
linkages and patterns [26]. Several scholars have used remote sensing,
and spatial analysis (GIS) approaches to assess flood hazard conse­
quences on metropolitan areas, infrastructural, farmlands, and land-use
changes [27]. Urban expansion should be seen both as an urban land
layout or a spatial arrangement of a community at a given moment and
as a movement, or how the structural characteristics of urban space
change over time [28]. This unanimity causes problems in recognizing
administrative boundaries in cities and puts pressure and stress on the
natural environment [29]. In ensuring continued urban residence in the
coming days, fast-growing urban areas monitoring is essential[30]. In
this case, GIS and RS are significant and adequate monitoring tools in
urban planning and decision-making [31]. The impact of development
analysis is also considerable, with some cities performing better than
others in terms of urban growth management.
Urbanization will affect land-use change along urban-rural gradi­
ents. It will result in land application concerns such as farmland
116

A. Alzahrani et al.

Alexandria Engineering Journal 95 (2024) 114–131

use and land cover that occurred over time and found notable expan­
sions in specific regions within these cities, indicating significant urban
sprawl in recent decades. Hence, implementing more effective gover­
nance policies can aid in managing and restraining the area’s acceler­
ated and uncontrolled urban growth.

urbanization’s negative effects and ensure the long-term viability of
major cities, an innovative urban planning strategy is needed.
2.2.1. Urban growth in cities
Urban morphological change encompasses most city changes over
time, such as population composition, total area, and land cover [44].
Therefore, there has been an increase and continuing expansion of
geographical studies monitoring this transformation. Urban city growth
and land use changes are considered a classification of these studies that
track and monitor these changes over time [45]. A significant amount of
research has focused on the issue of urban growth in various cities
around the world. Gaining insight into land use and cover alterations has
become necessary for effectively managing and monitoring natural re­
sources and development, particularly in urban planning. Remote
sensing and geographical information systems are established in­
struments for evaluating land use and land cover alterations, which aid
planners in promoting sustainability [46]. One particular study was
conducted to identify and forecast changes in land use in Nepal using
remote sensing and GIS technology [47]. The study employed remote
sensing and geographical information systems to identify and detect
land use and land cover in Kathmandu, a city in Nepal that is highly
vulnerable to change and is witnessing rapid growth. According to the
study, the Kathmandu district experienced a decline of 9.28% in forest
cover, 9.80% in agricultural land, and 77% in water bodies over 20 years
(1990–2010)[47]. Rapid urbanization is the primary catalyst for these
changes, further accelerated by inadequate planning and significant
rural-urban migration. A study used Remote Sensing and GIS to examine
urban growth monitoring, simulation, and management in coastal cities
[48]. The study investigated the urban development of Alexandria by
establishing a geographic information system. This system is based on
satellite imagery data collected by Landsat between 1986 and 2016. The
study aimed to identify the most essential characteristics and the driving
factors that actuate, either directly or indirectly, the process of urban
growth. The evidence demonstrates that management regulations can
assist in controlling and limiting the rapid and unplanned urban
expansion occurring at the expense of natural resources [48].
Using geographic information system (GIS) and remote sensing
techniques, a study was carried out at the local level of Saudi cities to
forecast the growth of urban areas in Riyadh city over thirty years,
beginning in 2017 and ending in 2047 [49]. On the other hand, a study
uses remote sensing data to investigate the changes in land cover that
occurred in Al-Khobar over a decade, from 1990 to 2013 [50]. In
addition, a study carried out between 1973 and 2014 was obtained and
analyzed to keep track of the changes that occurred in Jeddah spatially
and concerning time [51].
Regarding Al-Baha, numerous studies have been published,
including one that aimed to observe and forecast changes in land cover
and analyze the characteristics and patterns of land cover change from
1975 to 2010. The study assessed land cover change in the Al-Baha re­
gion over the past 35 years. It revealed that this change had a notable
impact on the forest and shrubland, potentially disrupting the ecosystem
and natural balance of the study area [52]. A separate study examines
the expansion of the urban regions and alterations in land cover in
Al-Baha from 1984 to 2014. The study revealed a 10% reduction in
forested areas, primarily attributed to creating recreational facilities in
the mountainous regions. Simultaneously, the built-up area experienced
a 24% expansion, primarily at the expense of barren lands but also at the
expense of woodlands. The quality of the woodlands is also deterio­
rating, as dieback is occurring, and can be observed in the study area and
the southwestern mountains [53].
The unbalanced urban expansion of the city over time, along with the
resulting changes, the primary drivers of this expansion, and the sub­
sequent problems it caused resulted in alterations to the land cover,
resulting in rise to various issues. The phenomenon reduces forest area,
agricultural land, and water bodies, potentially disrupting the ecosystem
and the natural balance. These studies examined the alterations in land

3. Research approach
The research relied on the historical and behavioral approach and
the descriptive analytical approach by reviewing the stages of urban
development of Al-Baha and linking them to the development plans and
the directions of the national vision of the Kingdom 2030. The research
focuses on tracking the urban growth of the city land cover and its
mechanisms and its negative effects on the surrounding environment
and agricultural lands through the analysis of urban sprawl through
different stages of time for Al-Baha. This study seeks to survey and re­
cord the changes that occurred to the land cover of Al-Baha and the
urban changes therein in the period spanning 2006–2021.
This study’s approach depended on selecting the appropriate case
study and the appropriate data collection tools for this study. Following
this, the analytic framework for the case study was utilized to cover the
analysis of the collected data. This research was conducted using a case
study methodology [54], which relied on a substantial amount of in­
formation that can be obtained from various sources. Due to the wide
variety of data available for Al-Baha between 2006 and 2021, it was
selected as the location for this study. To that end, the study adopts
several approaches:
3.1. Deductive approach
A deductive approach is utilized to study Al-Baha city’s urban and
demographic changes through city charts and governmental reports is­
sued by governmental institutes and academic research.
3.1.1. Spatial analysis approach
The study adopts a spatial analysis approach to extract the digital
data supplied by satellite images and use them to record the urban
growth of land covers and its change in the studied area. Digital data was
processed, and final outputs were designed using ArcGIS v10.8. Area of
the study. This study is dedicated to detecting Al-Baha’s urban changes
with its established administrative borders throughout the extended
period between 206 and 2021. Satellite-based digital data have been
highly utilized in change detection at regional scales due to their
extensive availability and extensive archive. The remaining data from
before 2004, which was derived from the Ministry of Municipal and
Rural Affairs, shows that the changes that occurred in the urban area of
Al-Baha between 2006 and 2021 were not recognized. Using remote
sensing and geographic information systems (GIS) together can help
generate helpful information about the amount of land changes that
have occurred, where they have occurred, and what kinds of changes
have occurred. Also, using satellite imagery makes it possible to observe
urban change over time. It can be done retrospectively, which has
significantly advanced our understanding of urban changes in Al-Baha
during the selected period. This is accomplished by delivering infor­
mation at predetermined time scales. Therefore, all the descriptive in­
formation based on satellite imagery and the tabled information for the
study area have been analyzed accordingly. This approach allows for a
dynamic awareness of the urban system’s shortcomings and strengths
and the primary concerns that need to be addressed.
3.2. Data processing procedures
Satellite digital data has been processed using software: ArcGIS
v10.8. The essential steps in examining, processing, and analyzing the
satellite-based digital data are as follows:
117

A. Alzahrani et al.

Alexandria Engineering Journal 95 (2024) 114–131

3.3. Data collection

3.4. Image processing

The study relied on evaluating the status of the urban mass and its
extension from 2006 to 2021. The study adopted a research methodol­
ogy based on integrating GIS and remote sensing, where satellite im­
agery for Al-Baha, covering the suggested study period 2006 and 2021,
has been obtained from google earth and Esri online imagery. First, the
urban mass of the study area for the year 2006 was obtained and
monitored via satellite imagery from Google Earth. After that, the urban
mass boundaries were studied and determined in 2006. Then, the urban
mass was reviewed on the satellite imageries of the study area. The study
also relied on monitoring the urban expansion of the study area during
the year 2021 on the Esri satellite imagery and reviewing them with the
satellite imagery of Google Earth.

The goal of satellite image processing is to determine populated areas
and distinguish various land uses during the period represented by said
data. The image processing focused on enhancing the imagery by
combining them and filling the gap between them. In order to complete
the work entrusted with the research, field visits were made to the study
area to collect missing data from the site, such as the names of roads,
neighborhoods, and the covered land. The study classified the area’s
land cover into the following covers: urban use, mountains, soil, cliffs,
and plants.
4. The study area
Al-Baha region is located in the southwestern part of the Kingdom of

Fig. 1. Al-Baha region is located in southwest Saudi Arabia.
118

A. Alzahrani et al.

Alexandria Engineering Journal 95 (2024) 114–131

Saudi Arabia (Fig. 1), 180 km south of Taif and about 410 km north of
the city of Abha. The Makkah region surrounds the Al-Baha region
except in the southeast, bordered by the Asir region. Al-Baha region is
considered one of the smallest regions in the Kingdom in terms of area,
approximately 36,000 km2 [55]. Al-Baha region constitutes 1.6% of the
total area of Saudi Arabia and consists of nine main governorates:
Al-Baha, Baljurashi, Al-Mandaq, Al-Makhwah, Qilwah, Al-Aqeeq,
Ghamed Al-Zinad, Al-Hajrah and Al-Qura [56]. In total, there are
three distinct geographical sectors in the Al-Baha region. These three
sectors are represented in the mountainous Sarah sector, the Badia
sector, the semi-desert part, and the coastal sector of Tihama. The area is
separated by a huge rocky cliff, which is the extension of the Sarah
Mountain range, where it descends more than 2500 m in a west direction
towards the Tihama sector [2]. The area east of Al-Shafa is divided into
two parts: the mountainous Sarah and the Badia. The topography of the
Al-Baha region is exposed hills consisting of rocks with gradual slopes
cut by narrow valleys [55]. The climate of the Al Baha region is mod­
erate and pleasant in summer and cold in winter. Its mountainous nature
characterizes Al-Baha, between 1500 and 2500 m above sea level, along
with the Sarah Mountain range [55]. The importance of Al-Baha comes
from its strategic location as the meeting point of the main roads linking
the main cities in the region [2].
By comparing the classification of satellite imagery of the studied
area between 2006 and 2021, a qualitative and quantitative change was
detected in land use. The study argues that the change was limited to a
rise in particular land use, such as transforming some agricultural land
or mountain areas into urban areas and roads. Change also occurred in
terms of a decrease, such as empty lands transformed into roads,
buildings, or city facilities. Al-Baha went through rapid changes,
resulting in land cover changes throughout the past 15 years. Through
tracing the most noticeable changes on the land cover of the map AlBaha, the study notices a rapid rise in urban use in Al-Baha. It is pri­
marily related to many factors such as political, economic, social,
geographic, and cultural factors. For instance, the result of the process of
urbanizing the countryside adjacent to the city became a part of it by an
administrative decision. Therefore, it is essential to understand the
historical development of urban growth in Al-Baha to develop a
comprehensive view of the factors that directly affect the city’s expan­
sion and control.

growth [61].
5.2. Origin and development of Al-Baha
Al Baha is a newly emerging city. Al-Baha is one of the new Saudi
cities that appeared on the Kingdom’s map after 1974. It did not exist as
a city before that date when the capital of the Al-Baha administrative
region was the city of Baljurashi. Al-Baha was one of the villages of this
region. Hence, it owes more to the administrative definition than the
functional one. Al-Baha is a group of villages. In the period after World
War I, the village of Al-Zafeer was the administrative center of what was
then known as Bilad Ghamed. Upon establishing the Saudi government,
Ghamid and Zahran became administered as a unit in 1925. The Saudi
authorities moved the seat of the local government to Baljurashi, a town
located 14 km south of Al-Zafeer [55].
5.3. The geographical location of the study area and its spatial relations
Al-Baha is the capital of the Al-Baha Administrative Region. Al-Baha
is one of the fourteen administrative regions that make up Saudi Arabia.
Al-Baha is the smallest administrative area in Saudi Arabia and the least
populated [2]. Its area is about 10,690 km2, representing about 0.04% of
the area of Saudi Arabia, which is about 25.2 million km2 [62].
The main administrative area of Al-Baha is part of the southwestern
region in western Saudi Arabia, known as the Sarawat Mountains. This
area is characterized by the presence of the Al-Shafa line, which repre­
sents the western boundary of the rocky crystalline Arabian Shield. It
also represents at the same time the water division line in the Sarawat
Mountains. In addition to that, this line divides the central administra­
tive area of Al-Baha into two parts, one east, which is the mountainous
Sarah sector, and the other west, which is the arid Tihama sector.
Furthermore, the city of Al-Baha is in the middle of that part of the AlShafa line that penetrates the central administrative area of Al-Baha.
Al-Baha city consists of 47 villages, the largest of which are Al-Baha
and Al-Zafeer [63]. With this statement, one of the government reports
on the development of the Al-Baha region began, and in the report’s
acknowledgment of the village of Al-Baha city, there is some truth to it.
However, the concept of the city is still not unified by most of the official
authorities [64]. Instead, the identification of the Saudi city is still an
area of controversy until recently. Al-Baha city is a city in which agri­
culture prevails, and it is the dominant function in the city because it has
no functional specialization. Al-Baha is also considered a city of trade
and agriculture, but it is certain that the city, in the concept of 1982,
consisting of villages - neighborhoods - Al-Baha, Al-Zafeer, and
Al-Zarqa, has become the commercial heart of a larger area, which is
what is known as the city’s master plan area [65]. This area, in partic­
ular, gained importance among those in charge of managing the city’s
affairs as the city’s borders until 1995 [64].

5. Result and discussion
Since the present is an expansion of the past, the survey studied and
observed the change that occurred in the land cover of Al-Baha in the
period crossing 2006–2021, concentrating on the examples of land use
and factors impacting it. Through the directed characterization of sat­
ellite imagery, the study arrived at the outcomes:
5.1. The historical development of horizontal urban growth in Al-Baha
The study of urban development in different historical periods is
necessary to understand the geography of the present time because it
sheds light on the current urban locality and answers many questions
about its interactions, structure, and growth [57]. Moreover, it gives a
great picture of what the city was like in different periods [58]. Urban
growth is defined as the state of the city’s extension and its overlap with
its surrounding neighborhoods throughout its history [59]. Several
factors that determine its size and trends affect the city’s growth.
Various elements influence the city, including physical, social, eco­
nomic, environmental, and governance. For example, migration, agri­
cultural growth, forest patterns, and sprawl are all socio-economic
factors that contribute to urban growth [60]. Perhaps the most impor­
tant of them is the economic factor, which takes many forms, the current
and future material capabilities determine the plans for its development
and the periods required to implement those plans—knowing that the
impact of those capabilities would lead to a stumble in the city’s urban

5.4. First: The historical development of the horizontal urban growth
Urban growth generally takes on two main dimensions. The first
dimension is the horizontal urban growth, while the vertical urban
growth represents the second dimension [66]. Cities grow and expand
due to many individuals, collective, and governmental decisions [67].
There are many geographical and non-geographical factors behind this,
and no city is without these physical and nonphysical factors [68]. By
comparing the historical periods of the city’s growth, the impact of
urban growth controls becomes apparent, strongly linked to each loca­
tion’s geographical characteristics and future extension [69]. Therefore,
horizontal urban growth is one of the dimensions of urban growth that
draws attention when comparing more than a different period of time to
a study area or more than one city [66]. The study follows this growth in
stages, and from here, it studies urban growth by studying the devel­
opment of urban spaces and urban buildings in the city.
119

A. Alzahrani et al.

Alexandria Engineering Journal 95 (2024) 114–131

Fig. 2. The city of Al-Baha is located in a middle area between Belad Ghamid and Zahran.

5.5. The evolution of urban growth (2006–2021)

from 2006 to 2021. Al-Baha has gone through several stages of urban
development and growth trends during the past years. According to the
comprehensive development plan for the Al-Baha region, the city of Al-

The study is mainly based on tracking the urban growth in Al-Baha

Fig. 3. The scattering of urban mass of Al-Baha during 1985. It was redrawn by the author from the comprehensive development plan of Al-Baha [70].
120

A. Alzahrani et al.

Alexandria Engineering Journal 95 (2024) 114–131

Baha in 1964 was what is now represented by the old market area, which
is part of the old village of Al-Baha (Fig. 3) [70]. Then the city developed
towards the east and south of the current old market area, or the
so-called central Al-Baha, and expanded in the north direction, which
was limited by the presence of Al-Baher mountain. The Al-Baha also
expanded to the west, which was limited by a mountain west of the
Raghadan area, reaching its area in 1987 about ten times 1964 [70].
Then the expansion of Al-Baha increased to the south and east until its
area reached about 3060 ha in 1982 [70]. After the city became within
the limits of 1982, it represented a small part of a larger area, which is
the city’s indicative plan area, which amounted to 327.5 km2. In 2005,
the expansion represented part of the indicative plan for 2025, which
amounted to 988 km 2. The following Table (1) shows the development
of the urban mass of Al-Baha and its trends from 2006 to 2021.
The urban mass area of the study area increased in 2020 to about 50
times what it was in 1982, with a change rate of (433%), and by adding
an urban area of 102 km2, equivalent to 10202 ha. The city witnessed,
between the years 2006 and 2021, which is 15 years, the most signifi­
cant horizontal urban expansion of the urban mass. The urban mass area
of the city has nearly doubled to about five times, and the urban addition
amounted to 73 km2, equivalent to 7267 ha, with an annual addition
rate of 32.3 ha/year.

with modern plans for the suburbs, such as schemes and some neigh­
borhoods in the city. However, the construction in the northeast direc­
tion was more than in any direction. It occurs due to the proximity to Al
Baha University and some vital services that help to attract urbanization
in this direction.
The study results of the urban development were similar to the
previous results prior to 2006 for several reasons. First, they depended
on the exact data for these periods from the Ministry of Municipal and
Rural Affairs and based on modern satellite images in monitoring the
urban growth of Al-Baha. However, the results differed for the years
2006 and 2021. The study results showed that the urban area of Al-Baha
for the year 2006 was about 5995 ha, and the block area for the year
2021 was about 13262 ha.
5.7. Second: the spatial dimensions of urban growth in Al-Baha
The spatial dimensions of urban growth are intended to analyze the
movement of urbanization on the ground in a particular area during a
specific period [71]. The study of the spatial dimensions of the phe­
nomenon of urban expansion is an original geographical goal, as the
spatial change does not appear in its proper form unless it is tracked on
the ground [72]. Moreover, analyzing the spatial elements can be
responsible for urban expansion, how the form of expansion changed by
tracking it in different periods, how urbanization expanded and reached
its current form, and which axes are more attractive to urban expansion
[73].

5.6. The first phase: prior to 2006
The total area of the urban mass of Al-Baha reached about 60 km2,
which is equivalent to 45% of the current urban area of the city. During
this period, the urban area of Al-Baha was confined to the neighbor­
hoods located around the old market area of the city, which is the old
city. To some new extensions, the city began to appear after that time,
besides the emergence of some random extensions in the city of Al-Baha
in many different directions characterized by flat land areas. The signs of
urbanization appeared in the random extensions of the city during this
stage (Fig. 4).
The last phase during the period 2006 until 2021:
The total built-up area at the end of 2021 amounted to 133 km2. An
increase of 221% over urbanization in 2021 has occurred. The actual
increase during this phase amounted to 73 km2, with an annual increase
of 4.9 km2 and an annual growth rate close to 32.3%. However, as a
result of the fact that the annual growth rate of urbanization was less
than the annual growth rate of the population during the recent period,
the urban density rate of the city increased to 91 people / km2, and the
per capita urban area decreased to about 25.1 km2 compared to the
previous phase (Fig. 5).
In the last phase, between 2006 and 2021, urbanization moved with
King Fahad Road, the most developed axis due to flat land, and Al-Baha
University has attracted urbanization powerfully. It also went with (King
Abdulaziz Road) and with (King Fahd Road), which are the most axes
The primary growth from the other axis (Fig. 5). However, the moun­
tainous nature of the city of Al-Baha determined the form of urban
growth, so urbanization began to grow in the form of longitudinal radial
axes emerging from the city center with the axes of regional roads and
the airport road. Urbanization continued to complete the urban spaces

5.7.1. Urban growth trends
Urban growth trends are essential to indicate the spatial factors that
stimulate urban growth in specific directions and reduce and limit urban
growth in other directions[74]. The study of urban mass growth trends
also seeks to determine which direction is of greater importance than the
other directions and which is more to explain the spatial difference of
urban growth. These factors measure urban growth in different di­
rections [75]. The urban growth trends also vary, and the urban spaces
and distances they occupy in the city vary. It is also possible to deter­
mine the trends of attractive and repulsive growth of urbanization in the
city through Table 2 and Fig. 6, which show urban growth in various
directions in various periods.
It is clear from studying the stages of urban development in Al-Baha
that the urban growth was not parallel or equal due to several factors.
Most of the urban expansion operations in the city are in the northern
and northeastern directions, as well as the southern direction, which
includes the southern and southwestern directions. This development of
urban expansion results from a group of urban growth stimuli, foremost
of which is the direction of the prevailing winds. The role of the pre­
vailing wind direction and its role in expansion has been explained so
that the newer sector seeks to be in the future of these winds fresh and
pure, leaving the old sector in the wind’s corridor with its pollution,
accumulation of waste, and atmospheric secretions [76].
Al Baha city formed a three-way growth pattern as it grew in three
directions. This is due to inhibiting factors that freeze and limit growth
in other directions and push it in these directions. As shown in Table 2,

Table 1
The development of the urban area and the urban expansion in Al-Baha from 1982 to 2021. It is prepared by the researcher based on data extracted from satellite
images for the years from 2006 to 2021. Moreover, the rest of the data before 2004 was based on the Ministry of Municipal and Rural Affairs data [70].
Duration
1982
1982–1987
1987–1995
1995–2006
2006–2021
Total

Interval

Urban Area
2

Urban Expansion

Year

Km

Hectare

Change %

Km

0
5
8
11
15
39

31
33
44
60
133
301

3060
3275
4420
5995
13262
30012

0
107
135
136
221
981

0
2
11
16
73

2

Urban Expansion Rate

Hectare

Hectare/Year

0
215
1145
1575
7267

0
43
143
143
484

121

Growth Trend
Random direction on the sides of the principal axes.
Random direction on the sides of the principal axes.
Random direction on the sides of the principal axes.
Random direction on the sides of the principal axes.
Random direction on the sides of the principal axes.

A. Alzahrani et al.

Alexandria Engineering Journal 95 (2024) 114–131

Fig. 4. The development of the urban mass of Al-Baha prior to 2006.

most of the urban growth and expansion operations during the period
2006–2021 are within the northern, eastern, southeastern, western, and
southwestern directions of the urban mass of the city. As a result, the
added area is more than 88%. Therefore, in this case, the urban growth is
considered more than three-quarters of the added area of the city.
Many factors stimulate urban growth, as shown in (Fig. 7). The King
Abdul Aziz Road heading from the southeast of Al-Baha city to the
northwest is one of the most important motivating factors, as it is the
regional road that connects the Asir region through Al Baha city and
towards the Taif Governorate of the Makkah region. The King Abdulaziz
Road also links King Fahd Hospital, located in the city’s west, to the
entire city. King Fahd Road, linked to King Abdulaziz Road, which runs
from the city center towards the east, is considered one of the second
most important factors stimulating urban growth. King Fahd Road
connects the city to Al Baha University and King Saud Airport, located
east of the city, to King Abdulaziz Road. Many of the city’s most
important administrative and social services are based on these roads,
which go to the north, northwest, west, southwest, and south, passing
through the city’s areas.
Urbanization extended around the central neighborhoods in the
center of Al-Baha, but from 2006-to 2021, it took three main axes. First,
urbanization extended to the north and northwest with the extension of

King Abdulaziz Road. Moreover, it spread to more than 20 km north of
the city center and the market area. Second, the relatively flat lands
helped urban expansion toward the east. The flat land on King Fahd
Road has been considered the most critical motivation for the growth of
the urban mass in this direction as the planning of the built-up block in
the city’s neighborhoods became in King Fahd Road towards the airport.
Finally, urbanization moved to the east, more than 15 km from the city
center (Fig. 8).
5.8. The controlling elements of urban changes
The most critical elements that control urban changes in the city are
location, topography, population, urban growth, roads, transportation,
land use patterns, services and utilities, land prices, and government
policies [77]. In this context, all stages of urban development were
studied, analyzed, and evaluated from the plans prepared for the city of
Al-Baha by the government institutes. The study and analysis were
conducted using the quantitative statistical method and the GIS program
to analyze the pattern of distribution and variance at the level of the city,
the municipality, the municipal sectors, and the highways of Al-Baha.
The urban development is characterized by its spread throughout the
city of Al-Baha, especially in the flat areas, because it is directly affected
122

A. Alzahrani et al.

Alexandria Engineering Journal 95 (2024) 114–131

Fig. 5. The urban area at the city level during the period 2006–2021.

land is in the torrential stream, and areas with hard rocks that cost
vast amounts of money to settle are considered natural expulsion
areas.
• Human expulsion areas are represented in lands near factories, far
from the city center, with a high price, lack or scarcity of services,
distance from main roads, low construction rate, lack of built plots,
and the change of the city’s plan for land uses.

Table 2
The growth direction and its area in Al-Baha during 2006–2021, based on sat­
ellite imageries using ArcGis v10.8.
Growth Direction
North
Northeast
East
Southeast
South
Southwest
West
Northwest
Total Area

2006

2021

Area

%

Area

%

308.54
396.27
1045.85
981.87
84.5
70.59
925.25
1734.89
5547.76

5.6
7.1
18.9
17.7
1.5
1.3
16.7
31.3
100

1725.4
1314.6
1728.5
1554.2
136.8
114.3
2022.3
4665.9
13262

1725.4
1314.6
1728.5
1554.2
136.8
114.3
2022.3
4665.9
100

The urban expansion in Al-Baha is uncontrolled, as it has been sub­
jected to many changes in development projects. The freedom to build
without planning controls resulted in an urban stumbling block that led
to a loose and random urban growth, surrounded by many vacant
spaces. It leads to the loss of the urban fabric of the city. There is evident
overcrowding in the neighborhoods located in the city center and scarce
space. More than three-fifths of Al-Baha residents live in neighborhoods
with random and spontaneous growth. This is because the planned areas
are reduced with this high population accumulation. However, there are
still many undeveloped areas, which means that the residents of these
neighborhoods live in buildings with vertical growth due to the small
built area.

by natural and human factors. It shows the areas of exclusion and
attraction of urbanization in the city as follows:
• Natural expulsion areas are represented in natural factors such as the
plot location, high areas, and steep areas. For example, the plot of
123

A. Alzahrani et al.

Alexandria Engineering Journal 95 (2024) 114–131

Fig. 6. The development of the urban mass of Al-Baha from 2006 to 2021.

The annual urban addition is more transparent and more expressive
than the urban addition at the period level, reflecting real growth. Be­
tween 2006 and 2021 is considered the most urban growth period, as the
urban addition amounted to about 7267 ha, equivalent to 73 km2
(Fig. 9). It occurred due to reasons that were previously identified. Be­
tween 1995 and 2006, the urban area has a rate of 1575 ha, equivalent
to 16 km2. Whereas, between 1987 and 1995, the urban addition
amounted to 1145 ha, equivalent to 11 km2. The period between 1982
and 1987 came as the least added urban spaces among all times. This
period is the lowest in terms of the rate of addition, as the lowest was
recorded at about 215 ha, equivalent to 2 km2 (Table 1).

north-east direction toward the airport, with a length of 45 km. Both
axes pass through the main valleys in the study area, as shown in Fig. 9.
The physical geography of the city area has led to the high cost of road
construction and limits of the city’s urban growth. The urban growth
flourished on the hills and has been associated with the construction of
roads. As a result, the roads are more closely interconnected than any
other city that does not resemble it in its natural conditions.
Due to the rugged terrain of Al-Baha and the resulting difficulty in
movement and poor communication, this area has remained somewhat
isolated from the rest of the Kingdom prior to modern road construction.
It had only some mountain tracks used for movement on the backs of
animals. As for the movement of residents from Al-Baha to Al-Mikhwah
Governorate, located at the bottom of the Sarah Highlands, it was a
complicated matter. Moving to Al-Mikhwah is closer to climbing
mountains than moving. While travel from Al Baha to the city of Taif
until 1947 was on foot. The construction of the road network in the
study area made it possible to live far from the central business district,
perhaps for distances of up to 20 km. As most of the city’s national
residents and some residents own private cars, the distance factor was
neglected when looking for housing. On the other hand, the construction

5.9. Human factors influencing urban growth
The roads in the city are considered the most man-maid elements
affected by natural phenomena. The main roads extend in the Al-Baha
region in the northwest and southeast direction. This axis is part of
the regional road extending from Taif through Al-Baha then Abha and
ending with the city of Jizan, which is about 870 km. The main axis
branches off from it in the city center area, by a secondary road in the
124

A. Alzahrani et al.

Alexandria Engineering Journal 95 (2024) 114–131

Fig. 7. The growth direction is toward the northwest of the city.

there is a major urban complex, Raghadan, which consists of eight vil­
lages, the largest of which are: Bani Saad and Al-Tawila. To the north of
the previous settlement, there is another community, the Rahwa area,
consisting of ten villages, the largest of which are Al-Jadiyah and Bal
Ala.
On Taif – Abha Road, to the south of the central business district,
there is a third urban cluster: Al-Malad, Wadi Al-Ali, and Al-Mafarjah. As
for the airport road, Al-Baha, there are two urban gatherings, the least of
which is the Al-Hamda and Al-Ra’eb. Here the urban structure is in line
with the nature of the agricultural area listed on the banks of the valley.
The second urban cluster is the cluster of Al-Sawad, Bashir, Bani Farwa,
and Al-Kara. It is clear from the above that the urban growth in the AlBaha city guide plan is a strip growth on the sides of the main road,
especially on both sides of the regional road Taif - Abha, where it is
noted that nine villages extend on one strip.
It can be said that the natural geographical obstacles to the growth of
the original city. It is responsible for the development of the city and the
expansion of its urban scope to resort to what can be called the process of
rural urbanization. Due to the inevitability of the city’s urban develop­
ment and in response to its functions, the city has become multifunc­
tional by adding administrative, recreational, and educational functions
to its dominant function, which is agriculture. In light of the pressure of
the natural geographical factors and their limitation on the growth
process, as they provide a small amount of land suitable for this growth,
the city has spread its border network to the neighboring countryside to
swallow up more than 40 villages and include them in its urban scope in
response to the planning requirements that the city needs. Hence, the
process of urbanizing the countryside adjacent to the city became a part
of it by an administrative decision. Therefore, it can be said that the
human geographical factors have met the natural geographical obstacles
to the city’s growth. The growth process of rural areas developed with
time to fill the rural gaps of the urban entity of Al-Baha. Mainly since
human geographic factors help accelerate the process of rural-urban
transformation and the imbalance of the rural balance for the urban
share. Among these factors are the attractions to the city and the push
factors out of the countryside.
People move from the countryside to the city in a process known as

of the road network has attracted the city’s central business district to
housing by non-citizens, and it has become undesirable for housing by
its original residents. The migration of local people led to urbanization
spread along the roads and away from the city center boundaries.
5.10. City growth axis
Several factors, namely control the urban growth process of Al-Baha
city:
1. The city is located on the edge of a mountain cliff, and its develop­
ment is impossible to the west.
2. The city’s hilly location does not allow it to expand and extend
except through the valleys in the hills of its area or on the slopes of
some of these hills, even though they are primarily agricultural areas.
3. Highways are part of the Abha-Taif regional road and the Al-Baha
Airport Road.
The city’s urban expansion to the west is considered impossible, and
therefore it occupied the valleys of the city area as a first stage, and then
some parts of the hills followed that. The geographical factor affecting
the urban growth process of the city now is the roads. Just as roads are
the component of the urban type, they have also contributed to the
formation of the social pattern in the city. It is considered the trans­
formation of the main road that the area’s people used to use in their
movements in the past, specifically Wadi Raghadan, into a part of the
regional road Taif - Abha. In addition to the construction of a road
linking the city center with the airport, the city’s connection to Tehama
via the Aqabat Al-Baha Road led the urban expansion toward the di­
rection of Tehama, which came through the expansion of paved roads.
These roads began to extend to the north on the sides of the regional
road linking the city of Taif and towards the northeast on the sides of the
airport.
As mentioned previously, the city’s urban areas gather around the
main road in its area. The city is the nucleus - the central business district
now - in the middle of it is the intersection of the airport road with the
regional road Taif - Abha, and to the north, on both sides of the last road,
125

A. Alzahrani et al.

Alexandria Engineering Journal 95 (2024) 114–131

Fig. 8. Urban growth trends and distance from the city center of Al-Baha for the years 2006–2021.

urbanization. The main reason for this process is to obtain a better
standard of living. In addition, there are many attractions in the city. The
following are the most prominent:
Attractions to the city:

for the city. However, essential factors are as follows:
– The lack of job opportunities leads to a high rate of poverty which
forces residents to look for better jobs offers.
– There is limited access to infrastructure and public services that drive
people to move to better living standards.
– The migration of the rural population moves to the city to improve
their standard of living.
– Facilitations in construction operations such as material loans and
land grants to citizens attract more citizens to the city.
– Part of the rural workforce has shifted to civilian jobs in the city.
– The city has expanded education, tourism, and government services,
leading to urbanization.
– The rapid development and growth of the road network in the AlBaha region attract more residents to move out of the rural area.
– All the above are the factors that will lead to the growth of the city’s
urban area in the future.

– The city provides job opportunities as one of the city’s main attrac­
tions. As a result of the economic growth in the city, the demand for
labor has risen significantly.
– The city provides the living conditions for the city’s residents.
– Higher labor wages compared to rural areas.
– Many different industries are available in the city.
– The city has educational institutions that offer various courses, skills,
and diverse topics.
– The city provides better health and education care than the
countryside.
– The city has the availability of various urban facilities.
Push factors to leave the countryside (abandonment of agricultural
land by some farmers):
Many factors affect and push the population to leave the countryside
126

A. Alzahrani et al.

Alexandria Engineering Journal 95 (2024) 114–131

Fig. 9. Urban development stages and growth trends at the city level during the period 2006–2021.

6. Conclusion

what can be called urban borrowing. Hence, the city’s urban growth is
considered an artificial growth that cannot be said to have come in
response to normal geographical conditions. On the contrary, it has been
found that human geographical controls have overcome their natural
counterparts that limit the city’s growth by choosing some rural-urban
areas adjacent to the city despite their scattering, distance, and small
area and counting these centers as parts of it. The nearby countryside
was artificially urbanized, indicating adapting human geographical
factors affecting city growth to natural geographical factors. Many fac­
tors aided artificial urbanization. Farmers abandon farms for city jobs.
The city’s road network expanded economic, tourism, and educational
activity, and supportive government facilities helped urbanize. Thus, AlBaha’s urban growth came in response to the requirements of its new
functions at the expense of its neighboring countryside.
The study additionally detected that the city’s natural obstacles have
caused it to encroach on rural areas. Since terraced agricultural lands
follow the natural topography of mountains and valleys, they attract
more urban expansion due to the apparent loss of abundant farmlands
and the ease of converting them to residential use. This research
concluded that many factors increase urban growth and random and

This study has taken considerable interest in understanding the dy­
namics of urban expansion and its patterns and the inconsistency of land
cover distributions in the Al-Baha. The study tracks changes in urban
land cover and observes the inconsistency in the land cover distributions
in Al-Baha during the study period. The area of Al-Baha city grew
initially due to the acceleration of the transformation of Al-Baha from a
village to a city. After being a village until 1974, Al-Baha became a city
in Saudi Arabia. It is now a built-up group of neighboring villages that
exceeds about 40 villages according to the administrative definition
rather than the functional definition. Al-Baha has a large, unoccupied
area on steep slopes. Given its topography, much of the land within the
boundaries is unsuitable for urban development. Current urban growth
is shaped by steep topography and agricultural land morphology. AlBaha’s morphology is linked to its urban growth, not city status. As a
result, the city’s area grew by 221% from 2006 to 2021. It increased in
urban areas from 60 km2 to 133 km2, which means false urban growth.
Therefore, it is not natural urban growth, as it is closer to an un­
natural increase than to a natural increase in the demographic sense of
127

A. Alzahrani et al.

Alexandria Engineering Journal 95 (2024) 114–131

Fig. 10. The regional road extends from Taif through Al-Baha then to Abha, whereas a secondary road extends in the northeast direction toward the airport.

irregular urban sprawl at the expense of the natural environment,
agricultural areas, and rural villages surrounding the city. Accordingly,
dealing with the issue of urban sprawl must be based on strategic
foundations and principles that consider the analysis of locations and
trends of development and the population’s future needs.

help prevent the modification of agricultural land uses and changing
their use. The study suggests defining borders that preserve natural
forests, particularly those that encircle and are adjacent to urban areas,
such as Shahba and Raghadan forests, and designating them as protected
areas. It is essential to encourage urban development and direct it to
locations suitable for urban development and not suitable for agricul­
tural development, especially on the eastern axis of the region. It is
suitable to create new urban centers capable of drawing residents and
easing the pressure in the west of Al-Baha city center along the western
cliff.
Moreover, it is essential to restrict the prevalence of the linear
expansion pattern, particularly in the northeast, and promote and
incentivize expansion across a broader range of areas by areas suited for
urbanization. In addition, a main axis should connect the urban growth
in the northeastern and northwest regions to facilitate linking between
them. It is advisable to slow down the urbanization occurring in the
western areas of Al-Baha; the ring road connecting the southeastern and
eastern regions should be stimulated. Additionally, it is urged to work
toward creating maps that highlight times when the Al-Baha region’s
expansionary scope changed noticeably and the urban boundaries that

7. Recommendation
Based on the research’s findings, the study suggests that in addition
to working to create a comprehensive plan for the region that supports
the best possible use of the natural resources and the potential to find a
balance in the region’s urban growth, corrective strategies for the pre­
sent and future should be considered by the environment. The study
advises that planning suitable areas should be the focus of urban
development, as agricultural development is not feasible in these areas,
particularly in the northeastern regions. It is advisable to create an urban
scale for rural areas comparable to cities and offer plans for current and
future urban growth improvements to protect open spaces and devel­
opable agricultural lands. Because of the significance of these agricul­
tural areas in the region, planning regulations should be developed that
128

A. Alzahrani et al.

Alexandria Engineering Journal 95 (2024) 114–131

Fig. 11. The city has spread its border network to the neighboring countryside to swallow up more than 40 villages and includes them in its urban scope in response
to the planning requirements that the city needs.

had to be reached in a certain period while being closely watched over
by development plans and their effectiveness.

2020.”

Declaration of Competing Interest

[1] M. Jayne, D. Bell, City of Quarters: Urban Villages in the Contemporary City,
Routledge, 2017.
[2] U. N. HABITAT, “Cities Prosperity (Al-Baha) Report,” 2020. Accessed: Apr. 16,
2022. [Online]. Available: chrome-extension://
efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj/viewer.html?pdfurl=https%3A%2F%
2Funhabitat.org%2Fsites%2Fdefault%2Ffiles%2F2020%2F04%2Fcpi_profile_for_
al_baha_2019.pdf&clen=1226931&chunk=true.
[3] F.A. Mubarak, Urban growth boundary policy and residential suburbanization:
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, Habitat Int. vol. 28 (4) (2004) 567–591.
[4] S. Al-Hathloul, M.A. Mughal, Urban growth management-the Saudi experience,
Habitat Int. vol. 28 (4) (2004) 609–623.
[5] D. Kumar, Appl. GIS RS Urban Plan. (2021), https://doi.org/10.13140/
RG.2.2.28603.75041.
[6] J.A. Parry, S.A. Ganaie, M.S. Bhat, GIS based land suitability analysis using AHP
model for urban services planning in Srinagar and Jammu urban centers of J&K,
India, J. Urban Manag. vol. 7 (2) (2018) 46–56.
[7] A. el Garouani, D.J. Mulla, S. el Garouani, J. Knight, Analysis of urban growth and
sprawl from remote sensing data: case of Fez, Morocco, Int. J. Sustain. Built
Environ. vol. 6 (1) (2017) 160–169.

References

The authors whose names are listed immediately below certify that
they have NO affiliations with or involvement in any organization or
entity with any financial interest (such as honoraria; educational grants;
participation in speakers’ bureaus; membership, employment, consul­
tancies, stock ownership, or other equity interest; and expert testimony
or patent-licensing arrangements), or non-financial interest (such as
personal or professional relationships, affiliations, knowledge or beliefs)
in the subject matter or materials discussed in this manuscript.
Acknowledgments
“The authors extend their appreciation to the Deputyship for
Research & Innovation, Ministry of Education in Saudi Arabia for
funding this research work through the project number: MOE-BU-10129

A. Alzahrani et al.

Alexandria Engineering Journal 95 (2024) 114–131

[8] S. Yamamura, L. Fan, Y. Suzuki, Assessment of urban energy performance through
integration of BIM and GIS for smart city planning, Procedia Eng. vol. 180 (2017)
1462–1472.
[9] X. Li, A.G.O. Yeh, Cellular automata modelling for urban planning in fast-growth
regions. Handbook of Planning Support Science, Edward Elgar Publishing, 2020.
[10] M. Marzouk, A. Othman, Planning utility infrastructure requirements for smart
cities using the integration between BIM and GIS, Sustain Cities Soc. vol. 57 (2020)
102120.
[11] M. Daoudi, A.J. Niang, Effects of geomorphological characteristics on urban
expansion of Jeddah city-Western Saudi Arabia: a GIS and Remote Sensing DataBased Study (1965–2020), J. Taibah Univ. Sci. vol. 15 (1) (2021) 1217–1231.
[12] S.W. Wang, B.M. Gebru, M. Lamchin, R.B. Kayastha, W.-K. Lee, Land use and land
cover change detection and prediction in the Kathmandu District of Nepal using
remote sensing and GIS, Sustainability vol. 12 (9) (2020) 3925.
[13] S. Lahoti, M. Kefi, A. Lahoti, O. Saito, Mapping methodology of public urban green
spaces using GIS: An example of Nagpur City, India, Sustainability vol. 11 (7)
(2019) 2166.
[14] F.R.Y. Alazzawi, Priority challenges and critical success factors for GIS in AlMansour Municipality, Int. J. Psychosoc. Rehabil. vol. 24 (02) (2020).
[15] M. Hiloidhari, et al., Emerging role of Geographical Information System (GIS), Life
Cycle Assessment (LCA) and spatial LCA (GIS-LCA) in sustainable bioenergy
planning, Bioresour. Technol. vol. 242 (2017) 218–226.
[16] H. Karimi, J. Jafarnezhad, J. Khaledi, P. Ahmadi, Monitoring and prediction of
land use/land cover changes using CA-Markov model: a case study of Ravansar
County in Iran, Arab. J. Geosci. vol. 11 (19) (2018) 1–9.
[17] N.R. Khwarahm, Spatial modeling of land use and land cover change in Sulaimani,
Iraq, using multitemporal satellite data, Environ. Monit. Assess. vol. 193 (3) (2021)
1–18.
[18] T.T. Werner, A. Bebbington, G. Gregory, Assessing impacts of mining: Recent
contributions from GIS and remote sensing, Extr. Ind. Soc. vol. 6 (3) (2019)
993–1012.
[19] H.M. Alshuwaikhat, I.R. Abubakar, Y.A. Aina, Y.A. Adenle, M. Umair, The
development of a GIS-based model for campus environmental sustainability
assessment, Sustainability vol. 9 (3) (2017) 439.
[20] G. Li, S. Sun, C. Fang, The varying driving forces of urban expansion in China:
Insights from a spatial-temporal analysis, Land. Urban Plan vol. 174 (2018) 63–77.
[21] M. Zarubin, L. Statsenko, P. Spiridonov, V. Zarubina, N. Melkoumian, O. Salykova,
A GIS software module for environmental impact assessment of the open pit mining
projects for small mining operators in Kazakhstan, Sustainability vol. 13 (12)
(2021) 6971.
[22] H. Shahumyan, R. Moeckel, Integration of land use, land cover, transportation, and
environmental impact models: expanding scenario analysis with multiple modules,
Environ. Plan B Urban Anal. City Sci. vol. 44 (3) (2017) 531–552.
[23] F.C. Prinsloo, Development of a GIS-based decision support tool for environmental
impact assessment and due-diligence analyses of planned agricultural floating solar
systems, Univ. South Afr. vol. 1 (2019) 1–121.
[24] B. Alharthi, T.A. El-Damaty, Study the urban expansion of Taif City using remote
sensing and gis techniques for decision support system, Adv. Remote Sens. vol. 11
(1) (2022) 1–15.
[25] J. Lella, V.R. Mandla, X. Zhu, Solid waste collection/transport optimization and
vegetation land cover estimation using Geographic Information System (GIS): a
case study of a proposed smart-city, Sustain Cities Soc. vol. 35 (2017) 336–349.
[26] S. Singh, S.N. Behera, Development of GIS-based optimization method for selection
of transportation routes in municipal solid waste management. Advances in Waste
Management, Springer, 2019, pp. 319–331.
[27] A. Abdelkarim, A.F.D. Gaber, A.M. Youssef, B. Pradhan, Flood hazard assessment of
the urban area of Tabuk City, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia by integrating spatial-based
hydrologic and hydrodynamic modeling, Sensors vol. 19 (5) (2019) 1024.
[28] C.M. Viana, S. Oliveira, S.C. Oliveira, J. Rocha, Land use/land cover change
detection and urban sprawl analysis. Spatial modeling in GIS and R for earth and
environmental sciences, Elsevier, 2019, pp. 621–651.
[29] P.A. Bhat, M. ul Shafiq, A.A. Mir, P. Ahmed, Urban sprawl and its impact on
landuse/land cover dynamics of Dehradun City, India, Int. J. Sustain. Built
Environ. vol. 6 (2) (2017) 513–521.
[30] C. Liping, S. Yujun, S. Saeed, Monitoring and predicting land use and land cover
changes using remote sensing and GIS techniques—A case study of a hilly area,
Jiangle, China, PLoS One vol. 13 (7) (2018) e0200493.
[31] A. Bose, I.R. Chowdhury, Monitoring and modeling of spatio-temporal urban
expansion and land-use/land-cover change using markov chain model: a case study
in Siliguri Metropolitan area, West Bengal, India, Model Earth Syst. Environ. vol. 6
(4) (2020) 2235–2249.
[32] H. Cao, et al., Urban expansion and its impact on the land use pattern in
Xishuangbanna since the reform and opening up of China, Remote Sens. vol. 9 (2)
(2017) 137.
[33] M.H.A. Ghurah, et al., Assessment of urban growth and sprawl using GIS and
remote sensing techniques in South Ghor region, Al-Karak, Jordan, Int. J. Eng.
Technol. (UAE) vol. 7 (3.1) (2018) 5–11.
[34] A. Berila, F. Isufi, Two decades (2000–2020) Measuring urban sprawl using GIS, RS
and landscape metrics: a case study of municipality of Prishtina (Kosovo), J. Ecol.
Eng. vol. 22 (6) (2021).
[35] S. Mansour, M. Al-Belushi, T. Al-Awadhi, Monitoring land use and land cover
changes in the mountainous cities of Oman using GIS and CA-Markov modelling
techniques, Land Use Policy vol. 91 (2020) 104414.
[36] B. Rimal, L. Zhang, H. Keshtkar, N. Wang, Y. Lin, Monitoring and modeling of
spatiotemporal urban expansion and land-use/land-cover change using integrated
Markov chain cellular automata model, ISPRS Int. J. Geoinf. vol. 6 (9) (2017) 288.

[37] M.K. Jat, M. Choudhary, A. Saxena, Urban growth assessment and prediction using
RS, GIS and SLEUTH model for a heterogeneous urban fringe, Egypt. J. Remote
Sens. Space Sci. vol. 20 (2) (2017) 223–241.
[38] J. Bahrawi, H. Ewea, A. Kamis, M. Elhag, Potential flood risk due to urbanization
expansion in arid environments, Saudi Arabia, Nat. Hazards vol. 104 (1) (2020)
795–809.
[39] A.M. Almadini, A.A. Hassaballa, Depicting changes in land surface cover at AlHassa oasis of Saudi Arabia using remote sensing and GIS techniques, PLoS One
vol. 14 (11) (2019) e0221115.
[40] A.K. Abd El Aal, M. Kamel, S.H. Alyami, Environmental analysis of land use and
land change of Najran city: GIS and remote sensing, Arab J. Sci. Eng. vol. 45 (10)
(2020) 8803–8816.
[41] A.F. Alqurashi, L. Kumar, An assessment of the impact of urbanization and land use
changes in the fast-growing cities of Saudi Arabia, Geocarto Int. vol. 34 (1) (2019)
78–97.
[42] B. Wiatkowska, J. Słodczyk, A. Stokowska, Spatial-temporal land use and land
cover changes in urban areas using remote sensing images and GIS analysis: the
case study of Opole, Poland, Geoscience vol. 11 (8) (2021) 312.
[43] P. Riad, S. Graefe, H. Hussein, A. Buerkert, Landscape transformation processes in
two large and two small cities in Egypt and Jordan over the last five decades using
remote sensing data, Land. Urban Plan. vol. 197 (2020) 103766.
[44] T. Ünlü, Managing the urban change: a morphological perspective for planning,
ICONARP Int. J. Archit. Plan. vol. 7 (2019) 55–72.
[45] Y. Wu, S. Li, S. Yu, Monitoring urban expansion and its effects on land use and land
cover changes in Guangzhou city, China, Environ. Monit. Assess. vol. 188 (1)
(2016) 15.
[46] A. Alqahtany, GIS-based assessment of land use for predicting increase in
settlements in Al Ahsa Metropolitan Area, Saudi Arabia for the year 2032, Alex.
Eng. J. vol. 62 (2023) 269–277.
[47] S.W. Wang, B.M. Gebru, M. Lamchin, R.B. Kayastha, W.-K. Lee, Land use and land
cover change detection and prediction in the Kathmandu district of Nepal using
remote sensing and GIS, Sustainability vol. 12 (9) (2020) 3925.
[48] M.A.M. Elmorshdy, “Urban growth monitoring, simulation and management from
coastal cities management perspective using Cellular Automata, Remote Sensing
and GIS: a case study of Alexandria governorate, Egypt”, 2019.
[49] H.A. Altuwaijri, M.H. Alotaibi, A.M. Almudlaj, F.M. Almalki, Predicting urban
growth of Arriyadh city, capital of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, using Markov
cellular automata in TerrSet geospatial system, Arab. J. Geosci. vol. 12 (2019)
1–15.
[50] M.T. Rahman, Detection of land use/land cover changes and urban sprawl in AlKhobar, Saudi Arabia: an analysis of multi-temporal remote sensing data, ISPRS Int
J. Geoinf. vol. 5 (2) (2016) 15.
[51] M. Almazroui, A. Mashat, M.E. Assiri, M.J. Butt, Application of landsat data for
urban growth monitoring in Jeddah, Earth Syst. Environ. vol. 1 (2017) 1–11.
[52] S.H. Mahmoud, A.A. Alazba, Land cover change dynamics mapping and predictions
using EO data and a GIS-cellular automata model: the case of Al-Baha region,
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Arab. J. Geosci. vol. 9 (2016) 1–20.
[53] P. Pellikka, A.Y. Alshaikh, Remote sensing of the decrease of juniper woodlands in
the mountains of Southwestern Saudi Arabia—reasons and consequences, Arab. J.
Geosci. vol. 9 (2016) 1–12.
[54] J.W. Creswell, J.D. Creswell, Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and
Mixed Methods Approaches, Sage Publications, 2017.
[55] MOMRA, “Al-Baha City Profile”, Riyadh, 2019.
[56] A.-B. Province, “Al-Baha Province”, Al-Baha Province. Accessed: Apr. 12, 2022.
[Online]. Available: 〈https://shorturl.ae/XSmrM〉.
[57] M. Herold, H. Couclelis, K.C. Clarke, The role of spatial metrics in the analysis and
modeling of urban land use change, Comput. Environ. Urban Syst. vol. 29 (4)
(2005) 369–399.
[58] J. Xiao, et al., Evaluating urban expansion and land use change in Shijiazhuang,
China, by using GIS and remote sensing, Land. Urban Plan. vol. 75 (1–2) (2006)
69–80.
[59] M. Aljoufie, M. Zuidgeest, M. Brussel, M. van Maarseveen, Spatial–temporal
analysis of urban growth and transportation in Jeddah City, Saudi Arabia, Cities
vol. 31 (2013) 57–68.
[60] A. Siddiqui, A. Siddiqui, S. Maithani, A.K. Jha, P. Kumar, S.K. Srivastav, Urban
growth dynamics of an Indian metropolitan using CA Markov and Logistic
Regression, Egypt. J. Remote Sens. Space Sci. vol. 21 (3) (2018) 229–236.
[61] M. Wolff, T. Wiechmann, Urban growth and decline: Europe’s shrinking cities in a
comparative perspective 1990–2010, Eur. Urban Reg. Stud. vol. 25 (2) (2018)
122–139.
[62] M.S. El-Hawagry, M.R. Sharaf, H.M. al Dhafer, H.H. Fadl, A.S. Aldawood, Addenda
to the insect fauna of Al-Baha Province, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia with
zoogeographical notes, J. Nat. Hist. vol. 50 (19–20) (2016) 1209–1236.
[63] H. Aljasir, In Sarat Ghamid and Zahran, vol. 2, Dar Al-Yamamah, Riyhadh, 1977.
[64] A. Abdula’al, Saudi Cities: Land Use and Functions, vol. 1, Nahda Al-Sharq Library,
Cairo, 1996.
[65] G. bin Jreais, The written saying in the History of the South, Al-Baha and Asir, 5th
ed., vol. 1, King Fahd Library, Riyadh, 2014.
[66] W. Zhang, W. Li, C. Zhang, W.B. Ouimet, Detecting horizontal and vertical urban
growth from medium resolution imagery and its relationships with major
socioeconomic factors, Int J. Remote Sens vol. 38 (12) (2017) 3704–3734.
[67] I. Zambon, A. Colantoni, L. Salvati, Horizontal vs vertical growth: Understanding
latent patterns of urban expansion in large metropolitan regions, Sci. Total
Environ. vol. 654 (2019) 778–785.

130

A. Alzahrani et al.

Alexandria Engineering Journal 95 (2024) 114–131

[68] T.K. Bradshaw, B. Muller, Impacts of rapid urban growth on farmland conversion:
application of new regional land use policy models and geographical information
systems 1, Rural Socio vol. 63 (1) (1998) 1–25.
[69] N. Bihamta, A. Soffianian, S. Fakheran, M. Gholamalifard, Using the SLEUTH urban
growth model to simulate future urban expansion of the Isfahan metropolitan area,
Iran, J. Indian Soc. Remote Sens. vol. 43 (2) (2015) 407–414.
[70] MOMRA, “The Comprehensive Development Plan_ Al-Baha Region”, Riyadh, Jan.
1985.
[71] J. Cheng, Modelling Spatial and Temporal Urban Growth, Utrecht University
Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2003.
[72] Y.D. Wei, R. Ewing, Urban Expansion, Sprawl and Inequality, in: Landscape and
urban planning, vol. 177, Elsevier, 2018, pp. 259–265.

[73] S.H. Otuoze, D.V.L. Hunt, I. Jefferson, Predictive modeling of transport
infrastructure space for urban growth phenomena in developing countries’ cities: a
case study of Kano—Nigeria, Sustainability vol. 13 (1) (2020) 308.
[74] A. Schneider, K.C. Seto, D.R. Webster, Urban growth in Chengdu, Western China:
application of remote sensing to assess planning and policy outcomes, Environ.
Plan. B Plann Des. vol. 32 (3) (2005) 323–345.
[75] F.S. Taiema, M.S. Ramadan, Monitoring urban growth directions using geomatics
techniques, a case study Zagazig city-Egypt, Egypt. J. Remote Sens. Space Sci. vol.
24 (3) (2021) 1083–1092.
[76] S. Chang, Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, Integrating CFD and GIS into the development of
urban ventilation corridors: a case study in Changchun City, China, Sustainability
vol. 10 (6) (2018) 1814.
[77] B. Bhatta, Analysis of Urban Growth and Sprawl from Remote Sensing Data,
Springer Science & Business Media, 2010.

131

