See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/367191319

From Circular Economy to Circular Society: Analysing Circularity Discourses
and Policies and Their Sustainability Implications
Thesis · December 2022
DOI: 10.33540/1562

CITATIONS

READS

12

2,177

1 author:
Martin Calisto Friant
Autonomous University of Barcelona
35 PUBLICATIONS 1,436 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Martin Calisto Friant on 17 January 2023.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

From circular economy
to circular society:
analysing circularity discourses and policies
and their sustainability implications

Martin Calisto Friant

From circular economy to circular society: analysing circularity discourses and policies and
their sustainability implications.
ISBN: 978-94-6458-778-4
DOI: https://doi.org/10.33540/1562
Design and layout: AgileColor
Printing: Ridderprint

From circular economy to circular society:
analysing circularity discourses and policies and their
sustainability implications

Van circulaire economie naar circulaire samenleving:
een analyse van narratieven en beleid rond circulariteit en hun
duurzaamheidsimplicaties
(met een samenvatting in het Nederlands)

Proefschrift

ter verkrijging van de graad van doctor aan de
Universiteit Utrecht
op gezag van de
rector magnificus, prof.dr. H.R.B.M. Kummeling,
ingevolge het besluit van het college voor promoties
in het openbaar te verdedigen op vrijdag 16 december 2022 te 12:15 uur
door

Martin Calisto Friant

geboren op 24 Augustus 1988
te Quito, Ecuador

Promotoren:
Dr. W. J. V. Vermeulen
Prof. dr. E. Worrell

Copromotor:
Prof. dr. R. Salomone

Assessment committee
Prof. Dr. P. Deutz
Prof. Dr. M. Hajer
Dr. G. Feola
Prof. Dr. S. Leipold
Prof. Dr. F. Boons

University of Hull
Utrecht University
Utrecht University
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität
Maastricht University

Dit proefschrift werd (mede) mogelijk gemaakt met financiële steun van the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under Marie Sklodowska-Curie
grant agreement No 765198.

Contents
Chapter 1: Introduction

11

1.1 The sustainability challenges of the 21st century
1.2 CE as a contested “umbrella paradigm”
1.3 Research gap: what on Earth is circular about an economy?
1.3.1 Biogeochemical cycles of the Earth
1.3.2 Ecosystem cycles
1.3.3 Resource cycles of materials and energy
1.3.4 Political cycles of power
1.3.5 Economic cycles of money and wealth
1.3.6 Knowledge cycles of technology, information, and education
1.3.7 Social cycles of care
1.3.8 Addressing all relevant cycles and flows with a holistic view of circularity
1.4 Research question
1.5 Thesis structure
1.5.1 Chapter 2: A typology of circular economy discourses: Navigating the
diverse visions of a contested paradigm
1.5.2 Chapter 3: How circular is your tyre: experiences with extended producer
responsibility from a circular economy perspective
1.5.3 Chapter 4: Analysing European Union circular economy policies: words
versus actions
1.5.4 Chapter 5: Transition to a Sustainable Circular Plastics Economy in The
Netherlands: Discourse and Policy Analysis
1.5.5 Chapter 6: Sustainable Circular Cities: Analysing Urban Circular Economy
Policies in Amsterdam, Glasgow and Copenhagen

12
13
14
16
16
17
18
18
19
20
20
23
25
26
27
27
28
28

Chapter 2: A typology of circular economy discourses:
Navigating the diverse visions of a contested paradigm

31

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Methods
2.3 Results
2.3.1 Review of challenges and limitations of the circular economy
2.3.2 Timeline of circularity thinking
2.4 Synthesis and Reflection
2.4.1 Classification of circularity discourses according to their level of complexity
2.4.2 Development of a circularity discourse typology
2.5 Discussion
2.5.1 Conceptual implications of each circularity discourse type
2.5.2 Methodological implications and challenges of building a discourse typology
2.6 Conclusions

33
35
38
38
45
48
48
51
58
58
60
62

Chapter 3: How circular is your tyre: experiences with extended
producer responsibility from a circular economy perspective

63

3.1 Introduction
3.2 Literature Review
3.2.1 Circular Economy: Origins, History and Implementation
3.2.2 Extended Producer Responsibility
3.2.3 Composition and Treatment Options for Tyres
3.3 Materials and Methods
3.4 Case Study Description
3.4.1 Regulatory and Legal Overview
3.4.2 Extender Producer Responsibility: Structure and Implementation
3.4.3 Performance
3.5 Analysis and Future Implications
3.6 Conclusion

65

Chapter 4: Analysing European Union circular economy policies:
words versus actions

87

4.1 Introduction
4.2 Conceptual framework
4.3 Methods
4.4 Results
4.4.1 EU circularity discourse
4.4.2 Review of EU policy on the CE
4.4.3 Critical analysis
4.5 Discussion and recommendations
4.5.1 Targets and indicators
4.5.2 Eco-design
4.5.3 Economic incentives
4.5.4 Awareness raising and over-consumption
4.5.5 Biodiversity and energy
4.5.6 Towards a plural policy mix
4.6 Conclusion

89

66
66
68
69
71
72
72
74
77
81
85

90
94
97
97
99
106
109
109
110
111
112
112
114
116

Chapter 5: Transition to a Sustainable Circular Plastics Economy
in The Netherlands: Discourse and Policy Analysis

119

5.1 Introduction
5.2 Methodology
5.2.1 Stage 1: Conceptual framework
5.2.2 Stage 2: Definition of the Concourse

121
122
124
129

5.2.3 Stage 3: Establish Q-Sample
5.2.4 Stage 4: Recruit participants (P-Set) and conduct Q-Survey
5.2.5 Stage 5: Statistical analysis and interpretation
5.3 Results
5.3.1 Results from the analysis of the concourse
5.3.2 Analysis of Dutch Policies
5.3.3 Analysis of Dutch societal discourse on the transition to a sustainable
circular plastics economy
5.4 Discussion
5.4.1 The plastic discourse in the Netherlands
5.4.2 Policy recommendations
5.4.3 Limitations and future research
5.5 Conclusions

132
135
136
136
137
140
142
148
148
149
153
155

Chapter 6: Sustainable Circular Cities: Analysing Urban Circular
Economy Policies in Amsterdam, Glasgow, and Copenhagen

157

6.1 Introduction
6.2 Theoretical and conceptual background
6.3 Methods
6.3.1 Step 1: Academic literature review
6.3.2 Step 2: Collection, organization, and categorization of policies
6.3.3 Step 3: Case-study selection and document analysis
6.3.4 Step 4 Application of the policy-discourse framework
6.4 Results
6.4.1 Amsterdam’s circularity approach
6.4.2 Glasgow’s circularity approach
6.4.3 Copenhagen’s circularity approach
6.5 Discussion
6.5.1 Comparative analysis
6.5.2 Technological optimism and the limits to growth
6.5.3 Social justice and transformation
6.5.4 Participatory democracy
6.5.5 Sustainable post-growth urban planning
6.5.6 Policy recommendation
6.6 Conclusions and reflections

159

Chapter 7: Conclusions

195

7.1 Summary of key results and insights
7.2 Strengths and limitations of results and methods

196

160
162
163
164
165
166
170
170
174
179
183
183
185
186
187
188
190
191

200

7.3 Reflections on the sustainability implications of results
7.3.1 On the dominance of growth optimist discourses
7.3.2 On the dominance of segmented discourses
7.4 Final thoughts: towards a circular society

202

Bibliography
Publications & other materials related to this thesis
Academic publications in this thesis
Additional publications connected to this thesis
Videos connected to this thesis
Summary
Samenvatting
Acknowledgments
About the author
Research context

210

202
204
205

239
239
239
240
241
243
245
247
247

Chapter 1
Introduction

“A richer life is not only compatible with the production of fewer goods, it demands it. Nothing—other than
the logic of capitalism—prevents us from manufacturing and making available to everyone adequate
accommodation, clothing, household equipment, and forms of transportation which are energy conserving,
simple to repair, and long lasting, while simultaneously increasing the amount of free time and the amount of truly
useful products available to the population.”
(Gorz, 1980, p.28)

Chapter 1

1.1

1

The sustainability challenges of the 21st century

At the dawn of the 21st century, humanity is facing a historical set of socio-ecological
challenges that could determine its very survival on planet earth. Overcoming these
challenges might ultimately transform the very shape of the world and the nature of human
societies. The exact shape and form of this transformation will depend on the choices we
take now. Humanity is already overshooting six out of nine planetary boundaries which
maintain the equilibrium of the earth system (i.e. climate change, biodiversity loss, landuse change, toxic novel entities, freshwater change, and phosphorus and nitrogen cycles)
(Persson et al., 2022; Steffen et al., 2015; Wang-Erlandsson et al., 2022). Moreover, humanity
remains deeply divided and unequal with a large share of the human population still unable
to securely access its most basic needs, such as food, water, energy, sanitation, housing,
education, and healthcare (Raworth, 2017)1. Poverty, determined at 5.5 USD PPP a day, still
affects over 40% of humanity (World Bank, 2022), yet 26 people have as much wealth as the
bottom half of the human population (Lawson et al., 2019). There are thus deep disparities
between the large proportion of the human population that cannot meet their basic needs
and a powerful minority that grossly overshoots their fair share of planetary resources (Di
Chiro, 2019; Helne and Hirvilammi, 2019). In fact, the richest 10% are responsible for over 48%
of annual global GHG (greenhouse-gas) emissions while the poorest 50% are responsible
for only 12% of global GHG emissions (Chancel, 2021). The wealthiest 10% thereby consume
close to 30 times more than their fair share of GHG emissions to stay within the Paris target
of 1.5 C degrees, and the wealthiest 1% consume about 100 times more than their fair
share (Chancel, 2021). Similarly, in terms of material footprint, it is estimated that the richest
10% of the global population consumes about 70% of global resources while the poorest
10% consume only 1% (IRP, 2019; Marín-Beltrán et al., 2022). Accounting for both material
and carbon footprints, the wealthiest 10% of the world are responsible for 25 to 43% of
humanity’s total ecological footprint, while the poorest 10% are responsible for only 3 to 5%
(Teixidó-Figueras et al., 2016; Wiedmann et al., 2020). These inequalities in environmental
pollution and GHG emissions persist, while the actual impacts of climate change and
ecological degradation will disproportionally affect peoples and countries in the Global
South compared to those in the Global North (IPCC, 2022).
This situation is unquestionably unsustainable and unjust and has led many academics and
social movements throughout the world to call for a deep transition to ensure the wellbeing
of all while staying within safe ecological boundaries (Gupta et al., 2021; Hickel, 2019; O’Neill
et al., 2018; Raworth, 2017). To do so, in the context of massive global inequalities, there is a
pressing need to “shrink and share” humanity’s use of natural resources in a fair, sustainable,
and democratic manner (Ness, 2022). Indeed, it is not only necessary to shrink our impact on
1 Globally 11% of human population is undernourished, 15%, is illiterate, 9% lacks access to water, 32% lacks
access to sanitation, 17% lacks access to electricity, 57% lacks access to the internet, 24% lacks access to
adequate housing (Raworth, 2017).

12

Introduction

the planet to stay within safe planetary boundaries but also to share global resource use so
that all humans can have access to the means for a fulfilling life. Massive inequalities in global
wealth and resource use should thus be reduced so that no one can grossly overshoot their
fair share of planetary resources, and no one remains unable to access the bare minimum
for a good life (e.g. housing, education, food, water, healthcare) (Fanning et al., 2021). Many
academics thus argue that a wide-scale redistribution of wealth and planetary resources is
essential not only to ensure the functioning of basic planetary systems but also to ensure
that all humans have access to a meaningful, free, and dignified life (D’Alisa et al., 2014;
Hickel, 2021; Jackson, 2021; Latouche, 2009; Ness, 2022; Trainer and Alexander, 2019).

1.2

CE as a contested “umbrella paradigm”

The concept of a circular economy (CE) has been proposed as a solution to this multifaceted
socio-ecological crisis by various academics (e.g. Stahel, 2010), public institutions (e.g.
European Commission, 2015), and private organizations (e.g. Ellen MacArthur Foundation,
2015). These proponents expect many benefits from the implementation of CE practices.
By creating a production and consumption system without waste through the slowing,
narrowing and closing of resource loops, a CE could solve the problems of material resource
scarcity (Homrich et al., 2018; Stahel, 2016; Suárez-Eiroa et al., 2019). By establishing a
renewable energy production system with zero pollution and a regenerative agricultural
system, the CE could also solve the problem of climate change and food scarcity (Borrello
et al., 2020; Delannoy, 2017; Geisendorf and Pietrulla, 2018). By creating an industrial and
social system that produces only positive environmental externalities, it could solve the
problems of biodiversity loss, biochemical flow disruption, and water scarcity (McDonough
and Braungart, 2002; Stahel, 2010; Velenturf and Purnell, 2021). Moreover, by developing
innovative “glocal” systems of collaborative design, production and consumption, the CE
could inspire the sustainable revitalization of local and regional economies, leading to a
reduction of inequalities, unemployment and poverty in the Global North and South alike
(Arnsperger and Bourg, 2017; Schröder et al., 2020).
However, the CE concept is facing many challenges and limitations to reach those ambitions
(Millar et al., 2019; Skene, 2018; Valenzuela and Böhm, 2017). The use of the CE concept grew
very rapidly in academic, policy and business sectors in the last decade but it is still very
much in construction and evolution (Antikainen et al., 2018; Blomsma and Brennan, 2017;
Winans et al., 2017). There is hence much divergence between different circular economy
and society perspectives. Researchers have found 114 different definitions (Kirchherr et al.,
2017) and 38 different Rs (value retention options such as reduce, reduce, recycle) in the
literature (Reike et al., 2018a)2. The mix of widespread support and enthusiasm for the CE
2 This thesis follows the value-retention options (also called R-hierarchy, R-imperatives or simply R’s) established
by Reike, Vermeulen and Witjes (2018): R0 refuse, R1 reduce, R2 reuse/resell, R3 repair, R4 refurbish, R5
remanufacture, R6 re-purpose, R7 recycle materials, R8 recover energy, R9 re-mine.

13

1

Chapter 1

1

with the lack of conceptual clarity and consistency has led Korhonen et al. (2018b) to call it an
“essentially contested concept”. As with other essentially contested concepts, various actors
compete to influence the discourse on the CE for their specific objectives and promote
an interpretation of the CE, which fits with their political, social, and economic agendas
(Korhonen et al., 2018b; Repo et al., 2018). It has also been argued that many of these
actors have chosen to use a “deliberately vague, but uncontroversial” discourse on the CE
as a strategy to gain widespread support in the short term (Lazarevic and Valve, 2017, p60).
Mainstream CE propositions are often depoliticised and don’t address key socio-ecological
implications of a circular future such as: How are benefits shared and costs distributed?
Who controls CE technologies and patents? Are there any ecological rebound effects or
unintended social impacts to circular solutions? What are the sustainability implications of
different CE visions, projects, and policies? To address those questions, we must first ask
what circles, cycles and flows mean for an economy and a society in the first place.

1.3

Research gap: what on Earth is circular about an economy?

Human societies and our planet function through a wide diversity of cycles and flows. While
there are countless socio-ecological cycles and flows, the literature on sustainability can
help us find the most relevant ones in relation to the manyfold CE challenges identified
above. Reviewing decades of literature on sustainability, sustainable development and life
cycle thinking, Vermeulen highlights that the literature focuses on a dual “agenda of integral
ecological and societal fairness” (2018, p73); and identifies a number of crucial elements
needed to sustain human and planetary wellbeing (see table 1.1). These elements can be
resumed in the following seven cycles, which can help understand what circularity means
in relation to socio-ecological sustainability (see Figure 1.1):
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Biogeochemical cycles of the Earth
Ecosystem cycles
Resource cycles of materials and energy
Political cycles of power
Economic cycles of money and wealth
Knowledge cycles of technology, information, and education
Social cycles of care

14

Introduction

Solar Energy

es

es
cal cycl
emi
h
c
eo
Reso
og
urc
Bi
eC
m
e
t
s
c
y
y
cles
Ecos
yc
l
Wealth

1
Political
Power

Care

Knowledge

FIGURE 1.1 | Seven key socio-ecological cycles (the red, blue, and green loops around the figure represent
biophysical cycles while the 4 circles in the middle represent social cycles. All the cycles intersect one another to
reflect their multiple interconnections, interdependencies, and interactions).

TABLE 1.1 | Relationship between selected socio-ecological cycles and human and planetary wellbeing
in sustainability literature (based on Vermeulen, 2018).

Cycle

Relation to 27 midpoints
(business outputs) affecting
human and planetary wellbeing

Relation to 6 endpoints
(‘areas of protection’) essential
for achieving human and
planetary wellbeing

Biogeochemical cycles
of the Earth
Ecosystem cycles

Climate change,
Ozone depletion,
Acidification,
Eutrophication,
Ecotoxicity,
Land-use & degradation

Natural resources (availability)

Resource cycles of
materials and energy

Water resource depletion,
Resource depletion (other),
Nuisance

Natural resources (availability)

Political cycles of power

Human rights,
Zero corruption,
Responsible political involvement,
Compliance

Societal stability

15

Natural environment (ecosystems)

Chapter 1

Cycle

Relation to 27 midpoints
(business outputs) affecting
human and planetary wellbeing

Relation to 6 endpoints
(‘areas of protection’) essential
for achieving human and
planetary wellbeing

Economic cycles of
money and wealth

Labour rights and conditions,
Employment benefits,
Remuneration & wages,
Employment,
Fair inequality,
Compliance with regulations,
Fair contracts & competition,
Fair tax behaviour,

Fairness in the economic system,
Worker wellbeing,
Societal stability

Knowledge cycle of
technology, information,
and education

Development & learning,
Product safety & informing,
Fair marketing,
Sustainable innovation,

Societal stability,
Fairness in the economic system

Social cycles of care

Gender & ethnic equality,
Resource & cultural heritage,
Health & safety,
Human health-related pollution

Community livelihood

1

1.3.1 Biogeochemical cycles of the Earth
The Earth functions through many complex biogeochemical cycles such as the water,
carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, hydrogen, iron, sulphur and phosphorus cycles (Steffen et al.,
2015). These cycles lead to the circulation and transformation of matter and energy on
planet Earth through various biological and geological processes, such as transpiration,
erosion, wind circulation, ocean currents, and the movement of continental plates (Folke
et al., 2021). By doing so, they ensure that energy and materials are available to different
ecosystems and organisms throughout the Earth. These cycles also ensure the stability of
global weather patterns and maintain the integrity of the Earth’s atmosphere and its ozone
layer (Folke et al., 2021). Life on earth thus depends on these cycles, and maintaining their
effective circulation is thereby imperative. Yet, our societal system is seriously disrupting
all of the above cycles, especially the carbon cycle, which is causing climate change, but
also the water, phosphorus and nitrogen cycles, which are affecting key ecosystems and
reducing our ability to produce sufficient food (Mayumi and Giampietro, 2019; Murray et al.,
2017; Steffen et al., 2018).

1.3.2 Ecosystem cycles
Biodiversity and natural ecosystems also work through cycles which allow for the
continuous reproduction and regeneration of life (Skene, 2018). Energy flows through
ecosystems, entering first as sunlight via photosynthetic organisms such as plants, algae
and phytoplankton and succeeding through the different trophic levels of the food web

16

Introduction

(Hanumante et al., 2019)3. Nutrients are thereby continuously cycled in natural ecosystems
in a regenerative manner as the waste of one specie is food for another4 (Capra and
Jakobsen, 2017).
These ecosystem cycles provide key functions and services that enable the existence and
reproduction of life and human societies such as plant pollination, flood regulation, water
purification, soil formation, disaster risk reduction, climate adaptation, carbon sequestration
etc. (Buchmann-Duck and Beazley, 2020; Folke et al., 2021). The health and balance of
ecosystem cycles thereby fosters socio-ecological resilience and flourishing (Folke et al.,
2021). However, there is currently a severe weakening and collapse of biodiversity and
ecosystem functions due to human over-extraction of natural resources, habitat destruction,
industrial pollution, deforestation, climate change, the introduction of invasive species and
genetically modified organisms etc. (Haas et al., 2020; Murray et al., 2017; Springmann et al.,
2018). In fact, the current rate of species extinction is 100 to 1000 times the baseline rate
(Steffen et al., 2015) and only about 50% of the Earth’s terrestrial natural ecosystems remain
in relatively healthy conditions (Riggio et al., 2020). We are thus in the midst of what many
scientists have called the “sixth mass extinction event” (Barnosky et al., 2011; Røpke, 2019).

1.3.3 Resource cycles of materials and energy
Resource cycles bring materials and energy to human economies. After being extracted,
processed and consumed, resources are cycled through various recovery loops such as
repair, reuse, remanufacture, recycle etc. (Antikainen et al., 2018; Ghisellini et al., 2016). At
their end-of-use, resources are cycled back to nature either by being burnt and dissipated
into the atmosphere, by being placed into landfills or by being thrown into the environment
(Krausmann et al., 2018; Martinez-Alier, 2021a; Rammelt, 2020).
Waste that is not sustainably cycled can accumulate in natural ecosystems and cause a
degradation of human and planetary health (Morseletto, 2020). This occurs when there is
a lack of effective solid and liquid waste treatment and recovery or an excess of pollution
(i.e. when pollution exceeds the ability of the biosphere to assimilate it or exceeds safe
emission levels for human health) (Robèrt, 2002; Suárez-Eiroa et al., 2019). These cycles can
also be disrupted by the over-extraction of renewable resources beyond their replenishing
rate such as the overfishing of marine resources, the overdrafting of water resources, the
unsustainable management of forests, or the over-tilling of agricultural soils (Rammelt and
Crisp, 2014; Unruh, 2008; Velenturf and Purnell, 2021). Similarly, sustainability problems can
arise when non-renewable resources like ores (iron, copper, nickel, aluminium etc.) and
non-metallic minerals (marble, gravel, sand etc.) are over-extracted and not recycled back
3 It is worth noting that ecosystems in the deep sea, where no sunlight can penetrate, obtain energy from
hydrogen sulfide near hydrothermal vents rather than from sunlight.
4 However, it is worth noting that natural ecosystems are not perfectly circular because available energy
dissipates in each trophic level (typically 90% is thus “lost”). Thus, biological system cannot continuously cycle
energy and materials without the continuous inflow of additional energy from the sun (Skene, 2018).

17

1

Chapter 1

into the economy (Daly, 1996; Stahel, 2010; Suárez-Eiroa et al., 2019). Finally, unsustainable
resource flows can arise when resources are lost due to mismanagement. This happens when
resources are wasted before they are consumed due to losses in storage and transportation
(Marín-Beltrán et al., 2022). Accounting for all of the above, the global economy currently
sustainably cycles only about 8% of its total resource use (Haas et al., 2020; Haigh et al., 2021),
humanity could thereby run into critical resource shortages and overshoot key ecosystem
boundaries in the coming decades (Bihouix, 2014; Herrington, 2021; Turner, 2014).

1

1.3.4 Political cycles of power
Laws and institutions shape and determine how power circulates through human societies.
Decisions and authority can thus flow from the top down or bottom up depending on
the established governance models (Lawhon and Murphy, 2012). Different institutions,
maintain a balanced flow in the distribution of power between the different branches
of government (executive, legislative and judiciary) and between the different scales of
government (municipalities, regional governments, national states etc.). Balance of power
is also maintained in the cycles of power that occur during elections for local, regional,
and national representatives. Power also flows between the public and private sectors
beyond elections, with various lobbying mechanisms, multi-stakeholder platforms,
participatory bodies and public-private partnerships shaping how policies are developed
and implemented (Driessen et al., 2012). Unsustainable cycles of power can arise when
citizens lose the ability to democratically control their state due to the power of wealthy
economic “elites” or of entrenched political elites (or a mixture of both, as political and
economic elites are often hard to distinguish from one another due to the many “revolving
doors” between high level public and private institutions) (Frankel, 2018; Stiglitz, 2012).
Many academics have argued that the balance of pollical power is currently under threat
due to the large inequalities that have risen both locally and globally and due to the lack
of meaningful citizen participation in decision-making through democratic institutions and
processes (Löwy, 2011; Piketty, 2019; Sánchez-Cuenca, 2017). A broad range of mechanisms
exist to maintain a democratic flow of power that benefits all citizens such as participatory
budgeting systems, referendums, citizen assemblies, citizen juries, deliberative polling,
elections etc. (Calisto Friant, 2019; Dryzek et al., 2019; Fishkin, 2018; Fung and Wright, 2001).
These and other policies such as the respect of political and socio-economic human rights,
the creation of fair and independent judicial systems, the promotion of free and plural media,
etc. help in the creation of pluralist and inclusive institutions that ensure a fair, democratic
and balanced flow of power within human societies (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2012).

1.3.5 Economic cycles of money and wealth
Monetary resources flow and cycle through an economy, continuously shifting hands
between governments, firms, NGOS, individuals etc. This flow of wealth is a key element of
an economy’s resource provisioning and distribution system (Fanning et al., 2020; Røpke,

18

Introduction

2016). When monetary wealth accumulates too much in certain hands, it can generate
unsustainable inequalities that prevent the economy from running for the benefit of
society as a whole (Jackson, 2021; Piketty, 2019; Scharmer and Kaufer, 2013). The same is
true for wealth in the form of private property, especially private property in the means of
production (ownership of companies, technologies, tools and natural resources) as well as
the private property of land and housing (Felber, 2015).5 When money and private property
over-accumulate and stop cycling, this can create inequalities in a society’s distribution of
resources, which threaten the stability and effective functioning of its economy as well as
the freedom of its citizens (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2012; Hickel, 2021; Kallis, 2019). Many
researchers suggest this is currently the case as the top 10% of the global population own
76% of global wealth while the bottom 50% own just 2% (Chancel et al., 2022). Various
policy mechanisms can be used to counteract this inequality and ensure that wealth is
fairly and sustainably circulated throughout the economy. These policies include property
taxes, inheritance taxes, and taxes on financial transactions as well as redistributive policies
such as universal basic incomes, job guarantee programmes and the provision of free and
quality public goods and services like housing, healthcare, education, water, energy, and
social security (Cosme et al., 2017; T. Hartley et al., 2020; Piketty, 2019). In addition to this,
democratic worker control over companies and workplaces through unions, cooperatives,
and community-owned enterprises can help better distribute wealth within the economy
(Bookchin, 1982; Felber, 2015; Roberts, 2017; Song, 2016).

1.3.6 Knowledge cycles of technology, information, and education
Modern civilizations are built upon the knowledge and technologies of over 300.000 years
of human history. Our societies rest upon centuries of technical inventions from the wheel,
and the printing press, to the windmill, and the internet. We also rely on spiritual, artistic,
and social inventions such as philosophy, music, schools, and democratic institutions. The
flow of human knowledge and technology through writing, education, travel, research, and
storytelling can be seen as a major fuel for the development and progress of humankind
through history (Stiegler and Ross, 2018). Yet, overly stringent patent and intellectual
property laws, and the privatization and commodification of research, knowledge and
technology can limit the ability of all humans to share and equally benefit from new
technical and societal innovations (Frankel, 2018; Papanek, 1972; Zizek et al., 2008). The
accumulation of patents and technologies in certain countries, companies, universities,
or individuals can threaten the free and open sharing of ideas, which can prevent a fair
and democratic balance of power between different peoples. Policies and practices
that encourage open source and transparent sharing of information and technologies
as well as free quality public education from pre-school to university can help circulate
knowledge in more sustainable and inclusive manners (Kerschner et al., 2018; Vetter, 2018).
5 Many communist, socialist, and anarchist scholars, would rightly argue that any level of private accumulation
and ownership of means of production inherently prevents a fair and sustainable circulation of wealth (Albert,
2021; Bellamy Foster et al., 2010; Bookchin, 1982; Harvey, 2012; Löwy, 2011).

19

1

Chapter 1

1

Transdisciplinary teaching and research approaches such as participatory action research
can also help democratise knowledge flows by empowering marginalized and vulnerable
people in the creation, ownership and dissemination of knowledge (Escobar, 2018; FalsBorda, 1987; Vermeulen and Witjes, 2020). This democratisation of knowledge cycles can
also be achieved through pluriversal approaches to science that break the ivory tower of
western academic disciplines and embrace other forms of knowledge-making and worldmaking such as indigenous education, technological and spiritual traditions (Kothari et al.,
2019; Velasco-Herrejón et al., 2022).

1.3.7 Social cycles of care
Key cycles of care occur every day as people share love, affection, energy and time with their
family, friends, and communities. These cycles of care are often invisible and un-valued in
current societies, yet they are a fundamental cornerstone of human civilization that ensure
the health and reproduction of life (Dengler and Lang, 2021; Di Chiro, 2019; Nirmal and
Rocheleau, 2019). Care cycles are responsible for the well-being and education of children,
the feeding and nourishing of most of humanity, the regeneration of vital ecosystems, the
protection of biodiversity, the maintenance of people’s physical and mental health etc.
(Morrow and Davies, 2021; Pla-Julián and Guevara, 2019; Rogers et al., 2021). When these
cycles of care stop by being commoditized, by neglect, by lack of free time, or by lack of
funding for social services and safety nets; human societies can face major crises of socioecological health and wellbeing (Dengler and Lang, 2021; Helne and Hirvilammi, 2019;
Phillips, 2020). Moreover, care is key for societal resilience towards disasters, strengthening
social and community relations of care can thus be a central strategy to face the manyfold
socio-ecological impacts of climate change and biodiversity loss, such as hurricanes, floods,
mass migration, sea-level rise and heat-waves (IPCC, 2022).

1.3.8 Addressing all relevant cycles and flows with a holistic view of circularity
All of the above cycles are interrelated and should not be considered in isolation. This is
shown in Figure 1.1 as all cycles overlap one another and influence each other in multiple
ways (e.g. a failure in care cycles can cause a weakening of ecological cycles and vice versa).
Moreover, various other social-ecological cycles have not been represented above as this is
a simplification of complex planetary and societal structures. The main value of representing
those seven cycles thus resides in helping us understand what “circularity” and “circular” flows
can be about in relation to sustainability and human and planetary wellbeing. They help
expand the imagination regarding what is and what isn’t included as a “loop”, “cycle”, “circle”,
or “flow” when we talk of a “circular” economy and society. Moreover, these seven cycles are
very much aligned with the well-recognized conceptions, and principles, of sustainability
developed by Robèrt (2002) and by Herman Daly (1996). Robèrt describes a sustainable
society as one where “nature is not subject to systematically increasing: 1. concentrations
of substances extracted from the Earth’s crust 2. concentrations of substances produced

20

Introduction

by society; 3. degradation by physical means; and in that society 4. human needs are met
worldwide” (2002, p246). Similarly, Daly stipulates that sustainable development requires
first that renewable resources are harvested at a rate below their regeneration rate; second,
that waste emission rates are below the assimilative capacities of the ecosystems; and, third,
that the rate of depletion of non-renewable resources, does not exceed the rate of creation
of renewable substitutes (1996). Daly adds that “all economic and environmental decisionmaking should consider the well-being of future generations, and preserve for them the
widest possible range of choices” (1996, p15).
A central point that can be drawn from the seven socio-ecological cycles described above
and their relation to human and planetary wellbeing is that sustainability crises can arise
if any of these cycles stop flowing. Excessive accumulation, unsustainable exploitation, lack
of effective recovery, lack of sufficient redistribution or simply neglect can thereby lead to
important sustainability problems and even a collapse of planetary functions and societal
structures. Moreover, many academics have demonstrated that the current capitalist system
is negatively impacting all these flows and cycles (Brand et al., 2021; Hickel, 2021; Rammelt,
2020). Capitalism can be described as a linear system that continuously generates waste in
terms of social injustice, poverty, alienation, exploitation and conflicts over resources (Armiero,
2021; Biel, 2012; Marín-Beltrán et al., 2022) as well as waste in terms of environmental pollution,
biodiversity reduction and disruption of biogeochemical flows and cycles (Mayumi and
Giampietro, 2019; Rammelt, 2020; Spash, 2020)6. As Martinez-Alier points out, the growthdependent nature of the global capitalist economy means that it depends on the continuous
supply of raw materials and energy from “commodity extraction frontiers” and generates an
endless supply of waste that it sends to “waste disposal frontiers” (Martinez-Alier, 2021a). This
has created a global pattern of social and environmental injustice with countless ecological
distribution conflicts throughout the world and strong global movements of popular
resistance and revolt against the expansion of capitalist frontiers on human and natural
ecosystems (Armiero, 2021; Biel, 2012; Martinez-Alier, 2021b)7. Poor communities, indigenous
people, people of colour, women, LGBTI+ groups, and many more systemically marginalized
people, are thereby often united in their common struggle against the socio-ecological
impacts of this globalized economic system (Martinez-Alier, 2021a; Scheidel et al., 2020). This
conflict costs the lives of over 250 environmental and human rights defenders every year
(Font Line Defenders, 2020) and this tragic figure doesn’t count the thousands more who die
6 Because of these socio-ecological impacts of the linear capitalist system, some scholars call it a social and
environmentally entropic system (Biel, 2012; Giampietro, 2019; Martinez-Alier, 2021b, 2021a). Both social and
environmental entropy can be understood as the application of the thermodynamic principle of entropy to
our socio-ecological system. Entropy here is thus a measure of chaos, conflict, lack of diversity and disharmony.
An increase in environmental entropy is thus a reduction of biodiversity, a reduction of available material and
energy resources, greater pollution, lower resilience of ecosystems and a disruption of biochemical flows
and cycles (Giampietro, 2019; Martinez-Alier, 2021b). An increase of social entropy means a increase of social
injustice, unrest, poverty, exploitation, conflicts, violence and alienation while a reduction of social entropy
entails greater peace, equity, solidarity, reciprocity, harmony, health, democracy and conviviality (Biel, 2012).
7 The environmental justice atlas counts over 3500 ecological distribution conflicts to date (see https://ejatlas.org/)

21

1

Chapter 1

of hunger, lack of access to healthcare and sanitation, over-exposure to toxic pollution and
many other so-called “externalities” of the global capitalist economy (every year over 9 million
people die of hunger (Holmes, 2021), 2 million die due to work-related accidents and diseases
(ILO, 2022) and over 8 million die due to air pollution (Vohra et al., 2021)).

1

As mentioned above, the idea of a CE has grown in the discursive sphere as a way to
address the above sustainability challenges. Indeed, it is proposed as a new vision to reduce
waste and resource scarcity by sustainably cycling materials and energy in our economies
thanks to various value retention technologies and business models such as reduce, reuse,
repair, remanufacture, recycle, re-mine etc. (Blomsma and Brennan, 2017; Ghisellini et al.,
2016; Stahel, 2016). However, this mainstream vision of a CE only addresses the third of
the seven cycles mentioned above (‘the resource cycle’) and partly addresses the first
(‘biogeochemical’) and second (‘ecosystem’) cycles. Key social and political elements such
as the democratization of power, the redistribution of wealth and the nurturing of caring
activities, are thus typically absent from mainstream CE debates (Clube and Tennant,
2020; Genovese and Pansera, 2020; Moreau et al., 2017). There is also a significant lack of
academic research on the social and political implications of CE and on the public policies
to transition to a fair and sustainable circular future (Lazarevic and Valve, 2017; Millar et al.,
2019; Temesgen et al., 2019). Although some social movements and academics have started
to propose a “social CE” (Social Circular Economy, 2017), a “circular humansphere”, (Schröder
et al., 2020), a “careful circularity” (Morrow and Davies, 2021) or a “circular society” (JaegerErben et al., 2021; Jaeger-Erben and Hofmann, 2020; Leipold et al., 2021; Melles, 2021) as a
more inclusive and socially just approach to circularity, they remain a relatively marginal
part of the academic and societal discourse on the topic.
It is also worth noting that the CE is often promoted as a vehicle to decouple economic
growth from environmental degradation through the many eco-efficiency improvements it
hopes to bring about in material and energy resource cycles (D’Amato et al., 2019; Giampietro
and Funtowicz, 2020; Lazarevic and Valve, 2017). Yet, this growth-optimist approach to CE is
quite problematic from a scientific perspective, as a significant amount of academic research
has demonstrated that decoupling is neither happening nor likely to happen on a sufficient
scale to prevent climate breakdown and biodiversity collapse (Haberl et al., 2020; Hickel and
Kallis, 2019; Jackson and Victor, 2019; Parrique et al., 2019). In fact, research has shown that
economic growth is deeply tied to energy and resource use, and it is the main driver for the
continuous expansion of the commodity extraction and waste disposal frontiers (Giampietro,
2019; Marín-Beltrán et al., 2022; Martinez-Alier, 2021a; Rammelt and Crisp, 2014; Wiedmann et
al., 2020). Hence, by focusing on economic growth, regardless of real planetary boundaries and
limits, mainstream CE approaches currently lack a full understanding of the biogeochemical,
ecosystem, and resource cycles described above.
All in all, mainstream CE discourse and research often lacks a holistic vision of both social
and ecological cycles and remains attached to problematic assumptions about economic

22

Introduction

growth and decoupling. This technocentric discourse on CE presently dominates
the discursive landscape and could end up replicating current patterns of social and
environmental unsustainability and injustice (Genovese and Pansera, 2020; Mah, 2021;
Martinez-Alier, 2021a). Addressing those research and conceptual gaps on CE is a timely
endeavour now that the CE concept is still relatively young and remains in conceptual
development and construction. It is thus still possible to challenge and enrich the discourse
with different visions of what a CE is about and expand the imaginary of what a fair and
sustainable circular society can look like. The debate on the conceptualization and future of
the concept is a key academic and societal debate as any shape the concept takes now will
influence how it is understood and implemented in the future. Despite this, there has been
little research on the different and often contested discourses, governance processes and
policy mechanisms guiding the transition to a circular economy and society.

1.4

Research question

This thesis seeks to address the above research gaps regarding the key social, political,
and ecological implications of different CE policies and discourses. It thus aims to better
synthesize, compare, and describe the plurality and diversity of visions on a circular economy
and society. It does so by asking the following research question:
What are the main societal discourses and policies on the CE, how can they be
critically analysed, compared, and understood, and what are their sustainability
implications?
With this question, this research seeks to map and contrast competing visions of a circular
future so the diversity of the topic can be better understood. By acknowledging the whole
landscape of alternative CE proposals, this research opens the floor for an open dialogue
between different circular discourses and hopes to expand the academic and societal
debate on the topic. Ultimately, by answering the above research question, this thesis seeks
to foster a democratic cross-pollination of ideas, policy options, strategies, practices, and
solutions, and thereby enrich the imaginary of what a circular society can look like.
To answer the research question, this thesis employs an interdisciplinary mixed-method
approach including critical literature review, content analysis, text-mining, and a Q-method
survey (Brown, 1993).8 Case studies are European Union (EU) CE policies, Dutch CE policies
for plastics and tyres, as well as the CE action plans of 3 European cities (Copenhagen,
Amsterdam, and Glasgow). The choice of the EU as the centre of this thesis’s set of case
studies stems from the central role that the EU has played in the conceptual development
8 It is worth noting that, originally, the thesis planned to use transdisciplinary and participatory research methods
which directly include societal actors in the co-construction of scientific of knowledge (Lang et al., 2012).
However, the COVID-19 pandemic, and its implications regarding in-person meetings, events, and workshops,
which are central to transdisciplinary methods, forced us to change methodological directions.

23

1

Chapter 1

1

and popularity of the CE concept. Indeed, since the enactment of the CE Action Plan in 2015,
the EU and its various Member States have been global frontrunners in the adoption of CE
policies (Colombo et al., 2019; Fitch-Roy et al., 2020; Lazarevic and Valve, 2017; McDowall
et al., 2017; Wuttke, 2018). Considering the key position of the EU, which is often seen as
an innovator and agenda-seter for global environmental policy, its interpretation of the
concept will likely have a strong influence on how other countries and actors understand
and implement the CE (Fitch-Roy et al., 2020; Knill et al., 2020; Rijnhout et al., 2018). By
analysing how key policy actors in the EU are understanding and implementing the CE, this
research can thus uncover what visions dominate the policy debate and discuss what this
means for the future of the concept and its social and environmental implications. It can
also help identify key gaps and limitations in current CE approaches and propose solutions
from a plurality of alternative circular visions and proposals.
This thesis adopts the definition of discourse established by Hajer and Versteeg as “an
ensemble of ideas, concepts and categories through which meaning is given to social and
physical phenomena, and which is produced and reproduced through an identifiable set
of practices” (2005, p.175). Discourses enable and constrain how political and societal actors
understand and act on particular physical or social phenomena, shaping what can and
cannot be thought about and what range of policy options are possible (Dryzek, 2013; Hajer
and Versteeg, 2005). Various discourses can exist at one point in time; however, they often
compete with one another, and one or a few discourses typically dominate whilst others
are suppressed. Discourses are thus rooted in politics and power, as different actors often
compete for their discourse to become dominant and shape policy-making and societal
imaginaries (Leipold et al., 2019).
Public institutions can also decide to replicate and enact a specific discourse through their
actions and communications, thereby shaping the societal understanding of a specific
topic. The growth-based narrative of economic and societal progress, for example, is a
strong policy discourse that has shaped societal perceptions and understanding of GDP
growth and its socio-ecological benefits and impacts (Jackson, 2021; Latouche, 2009). An
institution’s policy actions can also be different from its discourse on a topic, revealing a
form of “organizational hypocrisy” (Knill et al. 2020). This is often called greenwashing or even
“circular-washing” (Hofmann and Jaeger-Erben, 2020), as it allows an institution to adopt
a progressive discourse to improve its societal image, all while taking few or no tangible
actions and risks to implement this vision. This thesis will seek to unpack these complexities
in the interaction between policy and discourse surrounding the CE transition.
All in all, by shaping the nature of public policy, discourses can shape the future of our
societies. Discourses define the range of futures that are available to us as well as our
understanding of what futures are deemed possible, reasonable, feasible and desirable
(Polak, 1973). The control and use of different discourses has shaped human history from
the construction of the first pyramids and cities to the development of monotheistic

24

Introduction

religions and the creation of nation-states (Harari, 2014). Discourses can define and frame
the socio-political visions that humankind decides to work and fight for. The control and
development of discourses is thus often an arena of power struggles and has shifted hands
through history from kings to priests to bourgeois capitalists (Piketty, 2019). Understanding
the major ideas and discourses of our time and who is controlling and framing them is thus
essential to better understand the shape of our present time and of our common future.
This is especially important for discourses surrounding the socio-ecological transition,
which is arguably the greatest challenge humanity faces in the 21st century, and for which
the CE is a key element of the discursive debate (von Weizsäcker and Wijkman, 2017). By
untangling the various discourses and policies surrounding the CE transition, this thesis
hopes to address these crucial questions and contribute to our understanding of social and
environmental change.

1.5

Thesis structure

This thesis starts by developing a discourse typology that serves as a conceptual framework
to analyse and compare the diversity and complexity of different CE visions both in
academic literature and in societal practice (chapter 2). Chapter 3 then constitutes a first
exploratory case study to better understand government and industry approaches to CE
through an analysis of the Dutch extended producer responsibility (EPR) system for endof-life passenger car tyres. By analysing this well-established and well-recognized system of
resource governance, this exploratory case study allows us to build a solid understanding
of how the CE is currently understood and implemented. Chapter 3 was written at the same
time as chapter 2. It, therefore, does not use the conceptual framework built in chapter
2 but rather an earlier one developed by Rieke et al. (2018). The next chapters focus on
applying the discourse typology developed in chapter 2 to different case studies including
EU policies (chapter 4), plastic packaging (chapter 5), and European cities (chapter 6) (see
Figure 1.2). The wide range and diversity of case studies allow for a broad understanding of
CE and its implementation in different sectors (plastics and tyres) and political scales (city,
national and international). In Chapter 7 (conclusions) research results, recommendations
and insights are reflected upon, and their social and academic relevance is discussed and
highlighted.

25

1

Chapter 1

1
typology

FIGURE 1.2 | Thesis structure.

1.5.1 Chapter 2: A typology of circular economy discourses: navigating the
diverse visions of a contested paradigm
This chapter establishes a conceptual framework that will constitute the backbone of the
thesis and that will guide the analysis of the case studies in chapters 4, 5 and 6. It does
so by answering the following research question: how to better navigate and analyse the
history, complexity, and plurality of circularity discourses by conceptually differentiating them
in a comprehensive discourse typology? To answer this question this chapter conducts a
critical literature review of the CE concept. This literature review led to the development of
a comprehensive timeline of circularity thinking, which identifies and conceptually classifies
72 different CE-related concepts from the Global North and South alike (such as Gandhian
and steady-state economics, buen vivir, doughnut economics and degrowth). This literature
review also led to the development of a typology of circularity discourses. The typology
classifies and describes circularity visions according to their position on fundamental
social, technological, political, and ecological issues. This research helps better synthesize,
compare, and navigate the plurality and diversity of circular discourse through history. It
thereby addresses the how part of this thesis research question (how [CE discourses] can be
critically analysed, compared, and understood) and it provides the basis for a more inclusive
and comprehensive discussion on the topic. This chapter can be useful for academics and
practitioners that seek to enrich their understanding of the CE concept, its history and its
diversity.

26

Introduction

1.5.2 Chapter 3: How circular is your tyre: experiences with extended producer
responsibility from a circular economy perspective
This chapter is a case study of the Dutch EPR system for end-of-life passenger car tyres,
a well-established CE policy, that is often seen as a best practice for sustainable resource
recovery and environmental governance. This case study analyses how the CE is currently
understood and implemented in the Netherlands and how it can be improved from
a systemic CE perspective. This chapter answers the following research question: how
effectively do current ERP systems function from the current ambitions of CE? To answer this
question this chapter uses a qualitative approach, using a combination of stakeholder
interviews and an analysis of EPR policy and reporting documents. This research assesses
the governance of this sector and reflects on the existing system, including its value
retention outcomes and its sustainability implications. The analysis reveals that the current
EPR system focuses on technological solutions and end-of-pipe approaches resulting in
limited circularity and sustainability outcomes despite high material recovery levels. The
current system also depends on the export of end-of-life tyres, which can lead to negative
social and environmental impacts. The chapter develops recommendations to address
these issues such as establishing a more transparent, democratic, and inclusive governance
system and focusing more on higher value-retention options such as refuse, reduce and
reuse strategies. By critically analysing the policies and governance of the Dutch EPR
system, this chapter reveals the underlying technocentric discursive vision behind this EPR
system as well as the sustainability implications that this approach has. It hence contributes
to answering the main research question of this thesis. This chapter constitutes a first
exploratory case study to better understand government and industry approaches to CE. It,
therefore, does not directly use the circularity discourse typology developed in chapter 2,
but rather an earlier classification of CE discourses developed by Reike et al., (2018), which
the typology further develops.

1.5.3 Chapter 4: Analysing European Union circular economy policies: words
versus actions
This chapter uses the circularity discourse typology developed in chapter 2 to analyse the
CE discourse and policies of the EU, and particularly the Junker Commission (2014-2019),
which enacted the CE action plan in 2015 and its related directives and regulations. The
research question asked by this chapter is: what discourse of the CE is advanced by the policies
of the Junker Commission (2014-2019), what sustainability implications does it have and what
alternative policies from the perspective of other circularity visions could be recommended?
To answer this question this chapter uses a combination of qualitative and quantitative
research methods including content analysis, keyword mining and policy analysis. The
chapter reviews the complex set of concrete CE policies and actions adopted by the EU and
compares them to the EU’s discourse on the topic. Results evidence a dichotomy between
words and actions, with a discourse that is rather holistic, while policies focus on “end of

27

1

Chapter 1

pipe” solutions and do not address the many socio-ecological implications of a circularity
transition. Several actions are then recommended to tackle the systemic challenges of a
circular future from a plural perspective. This chapter contributes to answering the main
research question of the thesis by uncovering the circularity discourse proposed by the
EU and unravelling its sustainability implications. The insights and recommendations
developed by this chapter can help both practitioners and academics seeking to improve
CE understanding and policymaking at the international and national scales.

1

1.5.4 Chapter 5: Transition to a sustainable circular plastics economy in the
Netherlands: discourse and policy analysis
This chapter examines the Dutch CE strategy for plastic packaging using the circularity
discourse typology developed in chapter 2. It does so by asking the following research
question: What are the main discourses in the transition towards a sustainable circular plastics
economy in the Netherlands and what implications and recommendations can be drawn
from it? The methods include a mix of media analysis, policy analysis, semi-structured
interviews, and surveys using Q-methodology. Results indicate that there is a dominance of
technocentric imaginaries, and a general lack of discussion on holistic and transformative
visions, which integrate the full social, political, and ecological implications of a circular
future. To address those challenges, this chapter proposes many policy recommendations
which can help both academics and practitioners better understand and implement
the transition toward a sustainable circular plastics economy. This chapter contributes to
answering the main research question of this thesis by revealing the underlying discourse
behind the Dutch plastic packaging system and its key sustainability implications. The
results from this chapter also help build a more democratic and diverse implementation of
circular policies and strategies.

1.5.5 Chapter 6: Sustainable circular cities: analysing urban circular economy
policies in Amsterdam, Glasgow and Copenhagen
This chapter uses the circularity discourses typology developed in chapter 2 to analyse CE
policies at the city level. It does so by answering the following research question: how can
urban circularity policies and discourses be critically analysed and compared, and what discourse
is advanced by different circular city policies in Europe? To answer this question, this chapter
conducts a critical literature review of academic research on CE policies at the city level to
develop a new conceptual framework. This framework is then used to critically analyse and
compare the CE policies of 3 European cities at the forefront of the CE transition: Glasgow,
Amsterdam, and Copenhagen. Results show that, while the three cities take a different
approach to CE and its social implications, the three cities share an optimist approach
to technology and economic growth. Various policy recommendations to improve CE
implementation at the city scale are proposed to address the weaknesses of their CE
policies in terms of social justice, growth dependence, and democratic inclusiveness. This

28

Introduction

chapter contributed to answering the main research question of this thesis by uncovering
the underlying discourse behind circular policies at the city level and analysing their key
sustainability implications. Results from this chapter are valuable for practitioners and
academics who are looking to improve urban CE policy development and implementation.

1

29

Chapter 2
A Typology of Circular Economy
Discourses: Navigating the Diverse
Visions of a Contested Paradigm

This chapter is based on Calisto Friant, M., Vermeulen, W. J., & Salomone, R. (2020). A typology of circular economy
discourses: Navigating the diverse visions of a contested paradigm. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 161,
104917. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2020.104917
An earlier version of this chapter was presented at the 25th International Sustainable Development Research
Society (ISDRS) Conference in Nanjing, China on the 27th of June 2019 and was published in its proceedings with
the following title: “advancing a critical research agenda on the circular economy”.

Chapter 2

Abstract

Graphical Abstract
Approach to social, economic, environmental and political considerations
Segmented
Holistic

Technocentric Circular Economy

Optimist

Reformist Circular Society

• Assumptions: reformed capitalism is compatible with sustainability • Assumptions: capitalism is compatible with sustainability and
and socio-technical innovations can enable eco-economic
technological innovation can enable eco-economic decoupling to
decoupling .
prevent ecological collapse.
• Goal: economic prosperity and human well-being within the
• Goal: sustainable human progress and prosperity without
biophysical boundaries of the earth.
negative environmental externalities.
• Means: technological breakthroughs and social innovations that • Means: economic innovations, new business models and
benefit humanity and natural ecosystems.
unprecedented breakthroughs in CE technologies.

Fortress Circular Economy

Transformational Circular Society
Sceptical

Technological innovation and collapse

2

Different actors and sectors are thus articulating circular discourses which align with their
interests, and which often do not sufficiently examine the ecological, social and political
implications of circularity. In this context, this research asks how to better navigate and analyse
the history, complexity and plurality of circularity discourses by conceptually differentiating
them in a comprehensive discourse typology. To answer this question a critical literature
review has been carried out, which first, examines and reflects on the core challenges, gaps
and limitations of the CE concept. Second, this research develops a comprehensive timeline of
circularity thinking, which identifies and conceptually classifies 72 different CE-related concepts
from the Global North and South (such as Gandhian and steady-state economics, buen vivir,
doughnut economics and degrowth). This leads to the development of a typology of circularity
discourses, which classifies circularity visions according to their position on fundamental social,
technological, political and ecological issues. This research thus seeks to provide a basis for a
more inclusive and comprehensive discussion on the topic, which opens the imaginary regarding
the many circular futures that can exist and allows for a cross-pollination of ideas, policy options,
strategies, practices and solutions.

• Assumptions: capitalism is incompatible with sustainability and
socio-technical innovation cannot bring absolute eco-economic
decoupling to prevent collapse
• Goal: a world of conviviality and frugal abundance for all, while
fairly distributing the biophysical resources of the earth.
• Means: complete reconﬁguration of the current socio-political
system and a shift away from productivist and anthropocentric
worldviews.

32

• Assumptions: there is no alternative to capitalism and sociotechnical innovation cannot bring absolute eco-economic
decoupling to prevent collapse .
• Goal: maintain geostrategic resource security in global conditions
where widespread resource scarcity and human overpopulation
cannot provide for all.
• Means: innovative technologies and business models combined
with rationalized resource use and strict migration and population
controls.

A Typology of Circular Economy Discourses

2.1

Introduction

The Circular Economy (CE) has become a “go-to concept” that has caught the attention of all
sectors of society in recent years, including academia, businesses, NGOs and governments
(Lazarevic and Valve, 2017). Searching online for the “circular economy” concept in 2008
would only show 20,570 results, the same search now leads to over 5.74 million, thus
surpassing the popularity of the many ideas that originated it, such as “industrial ecology”
(1.01 million results), and “industrial symbiosis” (195,000), and the ideas that are directly
related to it like “cradle to cradle” (3.14 million), “biomimicry” (2.47 million), and “performance
economy” (224,000)9.
Overall, the CE concept is viewed as a promising idea and ideal that has much to bring
towards addressing the challenges of the Anthropocene (Aurez et al., 2016; Geissdoerfer
et al., 2017; Murray et al., 2017). By proposing a regenerative and restorative system of
production and consumption, which closes the input and output cycles of the economy,
the CE is expected to solve the problems of resource scarcity, biochemical flow disruption,
and climate change, all while revitalizing local and regional economies (Batista et al., 2018;
Delannoy, 2017; Stahel, 2010).
While those ideals are very appealing, the CE concept is still under construction and debate
and it still faces many challenges and research gaps to fulfil its promises. Indeed, it is a
relatively new concept that is just recently catching academic attention. While there were
only 116 academic articles published on the topic from 2001 to 2008, this number has
grown exponentially to over 4,90010. Nevertheless, most of the CE discourse has actually
been developed by actors in the government and private sectors, which have specific
political and economic agendas, and have often used the CE as a narrative device for
greenwashing (Ampe et al., 2019; Korhonen et al., 2018b; Nylén and Salminen, 2019; Van den
Berghe and Vos, 2019). Public policy predates most academic research, especially in China
where the concept has been a national strategy as early as 2002 (McDowall et al., 2017; Qi
et al., 2016). Overall, the CE discourse has been dominated by non-academic sectors, which
are espousing many economic and environmental benefits of circular policies and business
models (e.g. Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2015; European Commission, 2015). However,
these discourses have failed to build a systemic and holistic understanding of the social
and sustainability implications of the CE (Millar et al., 2019; Moreau et al., 2017; Temesgen
et al., 2019). Moreover, there is little discussion regarding the complex and controversial
relationships between CE, energy, resources, biodiversity, entropy, and economic growth
(Bruel et al., 2019; Cullen, 2017; Desing et al., 2020; Korhonen et al., 2018a).

9 Search conducted in www.google.com on the 11th of November 2019, using the advanced search option to
search for all results before the 31st of December 2008.
10 Based on SCOPUS search for “circular economy” (abstract, keyword, title) search conducted on the 11th of
November 2019.

33

2

Chapter 2

2

Some authors argue that those conceptual limitations are not important for practitioners,
who need further empirical research rather than theoretical discussions (Kirchherr and van
Santen, 2019). Nevertheless, considering that the CE is still a relatively recent concept, there
is still a strong necessity to build its theoretical foundations. Otherwise, the CE runs the
risk of lacking systemic validity, and critical social relevance and its claims and propositions
might be unachievable on a relevant scale to effectively address the socio-ecological
challenges of the 21st century. In this context, the CE concept could easily be discredited
and disregarded as a new form of greenwashing or as an oxymoron, comparable to green
growth or ecological modernization (Gregson et al., 2015; Lazarevic and Valve, 2017;
Monsaingeon, 2017; Valenzuela and Böhm, 2017). This research aims to address such
conceptual risks and help actors better navigate and analyse the history, complexity and
plurality of circularity visions by establishing a typology of circularity discourses. Such a
typology can provide a basis for a more inclusive and comprehensive discussion on the
topic, which opens the imaginary regarding the many circular futures that can exist and
allows for a cross-pollination of ideas, policy options, strategies, practices and solutions.
To establish a systematic and consistent typology we used several research questions
as guidelines in our step-wise design process. First, what are the main challenges and
shortcomings of the CE concept? Second, what are the historical origins and linkages of
the CE with other concepts from the Global South and North alike? Third, what are the main
conceptual differences and similarities of the core circularity discourses? By answering these
three questions, this chapter develops the first 2x2 typology of circularity discourses to date.
While some papers do elaborate distinctions within CE thinking (see for example Blomsma,
2018; Blomsma and Brennan, 2017; D’Amato et al., 2019; Geissdoerfer et al., 2017; Homrich
et al., 2018; Korhonen et al., 2018b; Kuzmina et al., 2019; Marin and De Meulder, 2018; Merli
et al., 2018; Reike et al., 2018) no research proposes a systematic classification of circular
discourses. This chapter thus builds and expands on the work of those previous authors to
fill this research gap and develops a discourse typology which contributes toward a better
understanding and analysis of the CE and helps contextualize and navigate the plurality of
the concept and its manifold possibilities.
Moreover, this research finds that the many related concepts which the CE historically builds
on can positively contribute to its limitations through the cross-pollination of solutions
and ideas. This is particularly important now that the concept faces a period of “validity
challenge” (Blomsma and Brennan, 2017, p.609), and needs to address some of its major
critiques and limitations to propose a compelling, fair, resilient and sustainable future. This
chapter thus not only fills a literature gap on CE discourse analysis11 but also on the links
between the CE and alternative social discourses and ideas (Bruel et al., 2019; D’Amato et al.,
2019; Ghisellini et al., 2016; Moreau et al., 2017; Prieto-Sandoval et al., 2018; Schröder et al.,
2019b; Temesgen et al., 2019).
11 A Scopus search for “circular economy” AND “discourse analysis” (abstract, keyword, title), conducted on the
20th of December 2019, finds only 3 results.

34

A Typology of Circular Economy Discourses

The chapter is structured as follows: first, it describes the research methods (section 2.2).
It then critically reviews the challenges of the CE concept (section 2.3.1) and establishes a
comprehensive historical timeline of circularity thinking (section 2.3.2). The chapter builds
on these findings to differentiate circularity discourses based on the extent to which they
address the identified challenges (section 2.4.1). This is followed by the development of a
new discourse typology, which classifies circularity discourses according to their position
on fundamental socio-ecological issues (section 2.4.2). Finally, a discussion section (2.5)
reflects on the conceptual and methodological implications of this research.

2.2

Methods

There are no standard methods for developing a discourse typology as previous researchers
have followed a variety of different approaches (e.g. Audet, 2016; Dryzek, 2013; Schwarz and
Thompson, 1990; van Egmond and de Vries, 2011). This chapter was built based on a critical
literature review12, which is particularly valuable to identify conceptual gaps in the literature
and to develop new theoretical perspectives from a broad range of different fields and
perspectives (Grant and Booth, 2009; Greenhalgh et al., 2018; Saunders and Rojon, 2011;
Snyder, 2019).
In general, the main weakness of critical literature reviews is the inherent subjectivity in the
selection of literature (Snyder, 2019). A systematic literature review could reduce this bias
by having strict criteria for the selection of literature, which enables a detailed analysis of
a specific topic (Grant and Booth, 2009). However, a systematic review does not allow for
the effective integration of grey and academic literature, as well as academic literature in
languages other than English, which are not effectively indexed in the main academic search
engines such as Scopus and Web-of-Science (Albarillo, 2014; Morrison et al., 2012; Paez,
2017). Since this article aims to investigate the diversity of different circularity discourses,
rather than developing an in-depth analysis of a specific aspect of the CE, a critical review is
better suited to the objectives of this research as it can generally include a broader range of
perspectives and theoretical positions (Greenhalgh et al., 2018; Snyder, 2019)13.
This chapter was developed in four main steps, which build on each other and lead to the
construction of the typology of circularity discourses presented in section 2.4.2 (see Figure 2.1).

12 A critical literature review (also called integrative literature review) ”aims to assess, critique, and synthesize the
literature on a research topic in a way that enables new theoretical frameworks and perspectives to emerge
[…] This type of review often requires a more creative collection of data, as the purpose is usually not to cover
all articles ever published on the topic but rather to combine perspectives and insights from different fields or
research traditions.” (Snyder, 2019, p335-336)
13 Reviewers have noted that a meta-synthesis method of literature review could overcome some of the
limitations of a systematic literature, by adding expert consultations to search engine results to ensure a broad
and diverse range of literature (see for example Kirchherr et al., 2016).

35

2

Chapter 2

1.
Review of critiques and
limitations of the CE
(section 3.1)

2.
Timeline of
circularity thinking
(section 3.2)

2

3.
Classiﬁcation of circularity
discourses according to
their level of complexity
(section 4.1)

4.
Development of a
circularity discourse
typology (section 4.2)

Synthesis and Reflection (section 4)

Results (section 3)
FIGURE 1.1 | Main steps in research methods.

The first step consists of a critical literature review of the CE and its challenges, gaps and
limitations. This review does not focus on systematically or bibliometrically exploring what
has been written on the CE, as many recent systematic literature reviews have already
done so (see for example Blomsma and Brennan, 2017; Geissdoerfer et al., 2017; Ghisellini
et al., 2016; Homrich et al., 2018; Kalmykova et al., 2018; Korhonen et al., 2018b; Kühl et al.,
2019; Merli et al., 2018; Murray et al., 2017; Prieto-Sandoval et al., 2018; Reike et al., 2018).
Instead, it focuses on critically analysing the conceptual challenges of the CE and why they
are important to address. Literature was selected based on its relevance for answering the
research question, publication date (with a specific focus on recent work) and importance
(citation count, regardless of year). Moreover, to ensure breadth and diversity, literature
from various fields was reviewed including industrial ecology (Bruel et al., 2019; Saavedra
et al., 2018; Zink and Geyer, 2017), ecological economics (Giampietro, 2019; Millar et al.,
2019; Temesgen et al., 2019), environment and sustainability sciences (Korhonen et al.,
2018a; Repo et al., 2018; Schröder et al., 2019a), resource efficiency (Lehmann et al., 2018),
critical geography (Hobson and Lynch, 2016), engineering (Cullen, 2017), political ecology
(Bihouix, 2014; Fressoz and Bonneuil, 2016), waste management (Velis, 2018), political
sciences (Monsaingeon, 2017; Valenzuela and Böhm, 2017), business and management
(Geisendorf and Pietrulla, 2018) etc. Search engines included Google Scholar, Scopus, and
WorldCat: a total of 107 articles and books were thus reviewed.
In the second step, a timeline of circularity thinking was elaborated based on a broad
perspective of CE as an umbrella concept (Homrich et al., 2018). The timeline builds on those
previously developed by Blomsma and Brennan (2017) and Reike et al. (2018) and further
adds to them to expand the debate on the CE. To elaborate the timeline, the results of the
previous critical review were first carefully analysed, especially by examining what other
ideas and theories were commonly connected to the CE. Snowball sampling (Handcock and
Gile, 2011) was used to widen the focus to other similar sustainability discourses, especially

36

A Typology of Circular Economy Discourses

focusing on the most influential work in the area. Books and articles on closely related
concepts were thus examined such as “permacircular economy” (Arnsperger and Bourg,
2017), “performance economy” (Stahel, 2010), “cradle to cradle” (McDonough and Braungart,
2002), “degrowth” (D’Alisa et al., 2014) etc. Conceptual diversity, plurality and breadth was
sought by reviewing literature from the Global South and North alike as well as concepts
from both practitioners and academics. A complete list of 72 different CE-related concepts
was thus established. A key originating book or influential article was then reviewed for
each concept to analyse its relation to circularity and to organise each idea in different
historical and conceptual groups (Figure 2.3).
The third step is a classification of circularity discourses according to their level of complexity
(Table 2.1), meaning the extent to which each discourse addresses the complex challenges
identified in step 1. Five levels of complexity and a set of differentiating criteria for each
level were thus established based on those challenges, which include issues of temporal
and geographic scales, sustainability dimensions, and ontology. This allows for a clearer and
more consistent distinction between the various concepts presented in the timeline.
Finally, in the fourth step, a typology of circularity discourses was developed based on
previous classifications of environmental discourses (Audet, 2016; Dryzek, 2013; Mann,
2018; Schwarz and Thompson, 1990; van Egmond and de Vries, 2011) and their adaptation
to the particularities of the CE. The typology draws upon the findings of the previous steps
by integrating the most important challenges identified in step 1 as well as the core criteria
for the classification of circularity discourses (Table 2.1). Different 2x2 typologies were tested
with each axis representing a core challenge identified in step 1 or a differentiating criterion
developed in step 3. Different combinations were thus tried until a definitive version was
established, which could effectively incorporate and differentiate all the circularity concepts
presented in the timeline (Figure 2.3). When conceptually defining each discourse type,
the authors built on the results of previous research on the topic, in particular those, which
have sketched other distinctions in circularity thinking (see for example Blomsma, 2018;
Blomsma and Brennan, 2017; D’Amato et al., 2019; Geissdoerfer et al., 2017; Homrich et al.,
2018; Korhonen et al., 2018b; Merli et al., 2018; Reike et al., 2018), and which have analysed
circularity discourse in specific sectors (Colombo et al., 2019; Fratini et al., 2019; Kaźmierczyk,
2018; Kuzmina et al., 2019; Marin and De Meulder, 2018; Monsaingeon, 2017; Pardo and
Schweitzer, 2018; Repo et al., 2018; Rijnhout et al., 2018; Valenzuela and Böhm, 2017; Vonk,
2018; Welch et al., 2017). The above steps ensured that the final typology would not be
overly stereotypical or simplistic as it closely aligns both with previous research on discourse
analysis and key debates on circularity. Moreover, earlier versions of the discourse typology
were presented at an academic conference and three academic workshops to test and
improve it14. These workshops involved around 15 to 25 academic participants and allowed
14 The conference was the 25th International Sustainable Development Research Society (ISDRS) Conference in
Nanjing, China on the 27th of June 2019, 2 of the workshops were held at the Copernicus Institute of Sustainable
Development, Utrecht University, in May 2019 and December 2019, and a third workshop with the CRESTING
project research community in Lisbon, Portugal in September 2019.

37

2

Chapter 2

for the discussion of the discourse typology and 4 circularity discourse types. They helped
reduce inherent subjectivity in the construction of the discourse typology by collectively
discussing the description of each discourse type and cross-checking their relation to the
concepts in the timeline. Once the typology was finalized, it was used to classify the 72
concepts in the timeline (Figure 2.3) as well as a list of 120 definitions of the CE15 to evaluate
where the current and past circularity debates stand.

2.3

Results

2.3.1 Review of challenges and limitations of the circular economy

2

The major research gaps and critiques of the CE have been grouped into the 5 following
topics, which will be examined in this section:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Systemic thinking on entropy, growth, capitalism and decoupling
The materials, energy and biodiversity nexus
Evaluating and assessing the full impacts of a circular economy
Governance, social justice, and cultural change
Alternative visions of circularity

Challenge 1: Systemic thinking on entropy, growth, capitalism and decoupling
There is no agreed general economic or social theory underlying the CE. It is a useful
concept for organizing regenerative and restorative production and consumption systems,
but it is not based on any economic model or philosophical theory (Velis, 2018). While this
makes the concept simpler and easier to promote and adopt, it also means that it faces
key challenges, inconsistencies, and limitations in its understanding, application and its
systemic validity (Geissdoerfer et al., 2017; Korhonen et al., 2018b; Lazarevic and Valve, 2017;
Reike et al., 2018a).
For instance, there is little clarity regarding entropy and the laws of thermodynamics as
applied to a CE (Mayumi and Giampietro, 2019; Rammelt and Crisp, 2014). Since materials
degrade in quantity and quality each time they are cycled or used, they cannot be circulated
indefinitely (Korhonen et al., 2018a; Reuter et al., 2019). This means that to establish a perfect
CE, where all resource inputs come from recovered or renewable materials, a general
reduction in material demand, and economic throughput is necessary (Giampietro, 2019;
Korhonen et al., 2018a).
Due to the immense challenges and limitations of recycling and recovery activities, a fully
15 The set of definitions used are mainly those sampled by Kirchherr et al., 2017, which were supplemented
with the addition of a few more recent definitions from (Geisendorf and Pietrulla, 2018; Gregson et al., 2015;
Korhonen et al., 2018a, 2018b; Prieto-Sandoval et al., 2018). Please see supplementary materials for further
details.

38

A Typology of Circular Economy Discourses

CE might be just as illusory as a “perpetual motion machine” (Cullen, 2017). Even if a perfect
circularity of materials flows were possible, this would require a capping global resource
use at a certain sustainable level, so the economy can run only on recovered and renewable
resources. Yet considering the large unmet needs of over 45% of the global population
which remains in poverty worldwide16 (World Bank, 2022), capping material resource use has
critical geopolitical dimensions and necessitates an essential reconsideration of normative
questions regarding global justice, wellbeing and worldwide wealth redistribution
(Arnsperger and Bourg, 2017; Bengtsson et al., 2018; Schröder et al., 2019a).
Furthermore, there is a lack of investigation on whether and how the CE could lead to
an absolute, global decoupling of economic growth from environmental degradation
(Antikainen et al., 2018). The question of growth is perhaps the largest elephant in the
room for the CE. While proponents in the public and private sectors argue that a CE would
lead to over 600 billion euros in yearly economic gains for Europe alone (Ellen MacArthur
Foundation, 2015), this relationship is very unclear (Korhonen et al., 2018a). Due to the
inevitability of entropy and the inexistent evidence of absolute decoupling, there is no
reason to think that a CE can operate in a context of continued economic growth (Hickel
and Kallis, 2019; Jackson, 2016; Mayumi and Giampietro, 2019; Parrique et al., 2019; Ward
et al., 2016). As capitalism cannot operate in a context of degrowth, this would mean that
a fully CE is also inherently incompatible with the current productivist economic system17
(Arnsperger and Bourg, 2017; Audier, 2019; Kallis et al., 2018; Latouche, 2009).
Challenge 2: The materials, energy and biodiversity nexus
The relationship between materials, energy, biodiversity, and circularity is a critical area
that needs further research. Tackling climate change, biodiversity loss and resource scarcity
involves many complex trade-offs and synergies (Bleischwitz and Miedzinski, 2018).
Energy plays a key role in the cycling of material flows as it is needed to recycle, repair,
refurbish or remanufacture any product or material (Cullen, 2017). Wastes (such as end-of-life
tyres, biofuel pellets, food waste, and wastewater) can also play a key role in energy provision
(through energy-from-waste operations) and by doing so, they reduce dependence
on fossil fuels (Lehmann, 2018). However, energy recovery competes with higher-value
recovery options (such as recycling, composting or refurbishing) and generates significant
greenhouse gas emissions (Bihouix, 2014). A mismanaged CE transition could thus lead to
an increase in energy demand and greenhouse gas emissions (Monsaingeon, 2017).
Furthermore, transitioning to a fully renewable energy grid will require a large number
of material resources to build the new infrastructure such as wind turbines, solar panels,
16 Figure for 2015 considering a World Bank global aggregation measure that uses 2011 PPP and $5,50/day
poverty line (World Bank, 2022).
17 Productivism is as system based on ever-expanding productivity and economic growth as the main purpose
of human organization, it includes capitalism but also state communism as implemented in the USSR (Audier,
2019).

39

2

Chapter 2

smart grids, electric cars, trains and buses etc. (Moreau et al., 2019; Reuter et al., 2019). This
will inevitably increase the demand for material resources, many of which could become
inaccessible in less than 80 years, especially cobalt, lithium and nickel (Aurez et al., 2016;
Fressoz and Bonneuil, 2016; Suh et al., 2017). Yet, these scarce critical raw materials used
for renewable energy currently have very low recycling rates so various CE strategies are
needed to prevent material shortages, such as refurbishing, recycling, lifetime extension
and consumption reduction (Bengtsson et al., 2018; Bihouix, 2014; Lapko et al., 2019;
Monsaingeon, 2017).

2

On the other hand, it is also worth noting that the CE could be an avenue for energy saving
for some material resource flows as many secondary materials (mainly metals) can be
obtained at much lower energy costs compared to virgin ones (Aurez et al., 2016). Moreover,
improving waste management and eliminating landfilling can lead to lower methane
emissions, thus contributing to climate change mitigation (Hawken, 2017; Jurgilevich et
al., 2016). The interactions between CE, energy, climate change and material resources are
henceforth complex and need further research to build sustainable pathways toward zerocarbon circular economies (Bleischwitz and Miedzinski, 2018).
The third dimension to the abovementioned resource nexus between materials and energy
is biodiversity18. A zero-carbon CE can lead to increased demand for natural resources such
as wood, bio-fuels, bio-polymers, natural fibres, and land for wind, solar and tidal energy
(Heck et al., 2018; Suh et al., 2017). This is especially the case if biotechnology, biomaterials
and bio-based energy play a central role in a decarbonized “circular bioeconomy” (OECD,
2018). It is thus essential to balance an increased demand for natural resources and
renewable energy with efforts in biodiversity conservation and restoration to maintain the
biophysical health of the planet and the ecosystem services on which life depends (von
Weizsäcker and Wijkman, 2017). There is a generally recognized planetary boundary that
identifies the need to conserve at least 75% of the earth’s natural ecosystems (Steffen et
al., 2015). Currently, only 62% of natural ecosystems remain and the transition to a circular
and zero-carbon economy could further worsen this situation, especially if the complex
interactions between energy, biodiversity and material resources are not adequately dealt
with (Bihouix, 2014; Heck et al., 2018; Raworth, 2017).
Moreover, biodiversity provides key solutions to global problems by reducing soil erosion,
improving human health, contributing to climate change adaptation (through ecosystembased disaster risk reduction strategies), climate change mitigation (through carbon
sequestration), improving water quality and quantity (through watershed conservation and
restoration), improving soil health (through regenerative agriculture), reducing air pollution
18 It is worth noting that many other resource nexus perspectives exist. The academic literature typically speaks of
a water, food, energy nexus (Del Borghi et al., 2020), a water, food, energy, land and materials nexus (Bleischwitz
and Miedzinski, 2018) and more recently an urban nexus of “food, water, energy and waste treatment systems”
(S. Lehmann, 2018, p47). Here a new nexus approach is formulated based on the interactions, synergies and
interrelations which are most relevant for a circular society.

40

A Typology of Circular Economy Discourses

(through urban greening), improving waste-water treatment (through constructed
wetlands), and inspiring human creativity and innovation (Benyus, 1998; Delannoy, 2017).
These nature-based solutions must thus be better integrated with regenerative and
restorative CE practices (Del Borghi et al., 2020; Jurgilevich et al., 2016; Reynaud et al., 2019).
Moreover, a CE can also lead to reduced demand for goods through longer use rates,
reuse, repair, recycling, and refurbishing strategies as well as simple-living behaviours, all of
which can significantly reduce environmental pressures (Bengtsson et al., 2018; Hickel and
Kallis, 2019; Nieto et al., 2019). The interactions between energy, biodiversity and material
resources are graphically represented in Figure 2.2.
Materials for renewable
energy infrastructure

2

Energy recovery
from waste
Energy for resource
extraction and recycling
Recovered materials
require less energy

Materials

Reduced
demand for raw
materials

Energy

Circular
Economy
Nature-based
solutions

Resources (water, food,
fibers etc.)

Land and water

Biofuels

Biodiversity
FIGURE 2.2 | Interactions of the Energy, Materials, Biodiversity Nexus (synergies are marked in green
arrows, interactions with possible trade-offs are marked with red arrows).

Challenge 3: Evaluating and assessing the full impacts of a circular economy
Holistically assessing and evaluating the sustainability impacts of circular systems is another
large challenge. Research has found that many production systems that define themselves
as circular can lead to greater environmental impacts than their linear counterparts (such as
biofuels and biopolymers) (Hobson and Lynch, 2016; Monsaingeon, 2017; Velis, 2018; Zink
and Geyer, 2017). Moreover, a CE approach that focuses on eco-efficiency creates a rebound
effect, where reduced costs for one product or service lead to increased demand for it, while
also creating saving that incentivize consumption in other areas (Zink and Geyer, 2017). Thus,
efficiency gains lead to higher levels of overall resource consumption in the economy (Junnila
et al., 2018). This is known as the Jevon’s paradox and it has key implications for the realization
of a CE that does not end up causing more negative than positive impacts (Kjaer et al., 2019).
Even some product-service systems (PSS), which promote access to products and services (as
opposed to ownership), have had limited environmental benefits due to the abovementioned
rebound effect (Hobson and Lynch, 2016; Junnila et al., 2018; Kjaer et al., 2019).
41

Chapter 2

The development of clear indicators and assessment mechanisms to measure circularity,
while accounting for this rebound effect, is thus a complex issue that needs to be resolved
to ensure that circularity claims actually lead to ecological benefits (Antikainen et al., 2018;
Corona et al., 2019; Manninen et al., 2018). While some CE impact studies exist in China and
Northern Europe, more research is needed to fully understand the outcomes of circular
projects and solutions (Kalmykova et al., 2018; Saavedra et al., 2018; Winans et al., 2017) and
especially for result-oriented PSS, which could have a high sustainability potential if they are
well designed and implemented (Kühl et al., 2019).

2

The ecological footprint indicator might be a useful tool in this regard, as it allows the
measurement of the overall impacts of human activities, beyond punctual eco-efficiency
improvements (Junnila et al., 2018; Kaźmierczyk, 2018; Rijnhout et al., 2018). The better
integration of circularity and footprint indicators is thus key to ensure circularity interventions
actually reduce the pressure on the Earth’s biophysical limits (Arnsperger and Bourg, 2017;
Bruel et al., 2019; Temesgen et al., 2019).
Challenge 4: Governance, social justice, and cultural change
Another important challenge, which is often under-addressed in the CE literature to date, is
the social dimension, especially regarding issues of governance, justice, and cultural change
(Geissdoerfer et al., 2017; Hobson, 2019; Korhonen et al., 2018a; Millar et al., 2019; Moreau et al.,
2017; Schröder et al., 2019a; Temesgen et al., 2019). A Scopus search reveals that less than 17%
of articles on the CE are from social science and humanities (of a total of 4,901 articles on the
CE: 2,316 are in environmental sciences, 1,753 are in engineering, 1,191 are in energy sciences,
and only 804 are in social sciences or humanities)19. By overlooking social considerations, CE
research is proposing a technological path to sustainability that many have criticized for being
overly optimistic regarding the speed of technological transitions and the capacity of society
to integrate disruptive innovations, which challenge vested interests (Bihouix, 2014; Feola,
2019a; Fressoz and Bonneuil, 2016; Jackson, 2016; Latouche, 2009).
This approach also fails to recognize the massive socio-cultural change that a CE entails by
transforming consumption and production structures based on materialism, convenience,
and ownership to ones based on collaborative consumption, sharing economies and usevalue (Frenken, 2017; Hobson, 2019; Lazarevic and Valve, 2017; Pomponi and Moncaster, 2017).
When some of those social and cultural topics are addressed in the literature, it is dominantly
done through commercial approaches, such as new business models for the private sector
rather than from the perspective of a transformative social and solidarity economy (with some
notable exceptions such as Baruque-Ramos et al., 2017; Chaves Ávila and Monzón Campos,
2018; Gutberlet et al., 2017; Hobson and Lynch, 2016; Moreau et al., 2017; Schröder et al.,
2019a). Yet this is a key topic as evidenced by the work of Kirchherr et al., (2018) which found
that practitioners see cultural barriers as the main barriers to a CE transition.
19 Based on a Scopus search for “circular economy” (abstract, keyword, title) conducted on the 11th of November
2019.

42

A Typology of Circular Economy Discourses

Moreover, there is a general lack of discussion regarding social and environmental justice
aspects related to the CE. In a review of 114 definitions, Kirchherr et al. (2017) found that
only 18-20% include social equity considerations. Critical questions regarding, who controls
CE technologies and patents, and how the economic benefits should be distributed both
within and between countries, have thus received very little attention. Those are nonetheless
vitally important questions that will determine whether the CE will lead to more meaningful
jobs, closer communities, greater social equity and global solidarity or rather to increased
precarity, inequality, and neo-colonialism (Arnsperger and Bourg, 2017; Bihouix, 2014;
Schröder et al., 2019a). All in all, the CE could become a profitable industry owned by a few
corporations in a handful of countries rather than a transformative movement that benefits
all of humankind (Monsaingeon, 2017).
In his latest book, Thomas Piketty proposes a CE that circulates property and capital to
redistribute resources and counter capitalism’s inherent accumulative tendencies (Piketty,
2019). Further discussion on this form of CE is necessary to foster a circularity transition that
is socially, economically and ecologically sustainable.
The governance and political considerations of a CE also deserve greater attention and
study. Power plays a key role in the future of a zero-carbon CE transition as it determines
who controls the discourse, who takes decisions and who will benefit from them (Hobson
and Lynch, 2016; Lazarevic and Valve, 2017; Schröder et al., 2018). This is why it is key to
establish a democratic and deliberative governance system for a CE to ensure that everyone
is involved in its construction and that its benefits reach the most vulnerable. Yet, those
political considerations are rarely taken into account by the literature on CE, which has
mostly dealt with design, technological, managerial or business-led solutions (as evidenced
by Fratini et al., 2019; Millar et al., 2019; Moreau et al., 2017). The Gilet Jaune movement
illustrates the risks of a sustainability transition that does not sufficiently include social
justice elements (Deléage, 2019; Laurent, 2019).
Challenge 5: Alternative visions of circularity
There is limited research on alternative approaches to circularity such as degrowth (Kallis
et al., 2018), steady-state (Daly, 1977), and simple living/voluntary simplicity (Alexander,
2015) concepts, which have a rich academic literature and share the same objective
regarding the necessity to transform towards sustainable socio-economic structures which
are compatible within the earth’s system boundaries. Academics have indeed found core
synergies between these concepts and degrowth can especially complement the CE’s lack
of social dimension and system-wide thinking on entropy and biophysical limits (D’Amato
et al., 2019; Ghisellini et al., 2016; Hobson and Lynch, 2016; Schröder et al., 2019b). Degrowth
and simple living scholars also help conceive of circularity through a lens of sufficiency,
conviviality, and social justice rather than being overly focused on technological innovation
and eco-efficiency (Alexander, 2015; Caillé, 2015; Kothari et al., 2019). This sufficiency
approach has recently gained some support in the CE literature as it can lead to a slowing

43

2

Chapter 2

of resource loops, with significant sustainability benefits (Bengtsson et al., 2018; Bruel et al.,
2019; Hayward and Roy, 2019; Hobson and Lynch, 2016; Schröder et al., 2019b). Yet a recent
review of 327 academic articles on the CE found that less than 10% of articles include this
approach (Homrich et al., 2018).

2

There is also little work on indigenous discourses on circularity and alternative concepts
from the Global South such as “ubuntu” (Shumba, 2011), “ecological swaraj” (Kothari et al.,
2014), “buen vivir”/“suma qamaña” (Calisto Friant and Langmore, 2015) and the “Buddhist
middle path” (Rinzin, 2006), which also share the goal of building regenerative systems that
respect, sustain and restore the natural cycles of the earth. After all, circularity, in traditional
hunter-gatherer, agricultural and pastoral societies, has existed for much of humankind’s
presence on planet earth and still exists in many parts of the world today (Giampietro, 2019).
This has yet to be recognized by the literature, which is hence missing the opportunity
to build key synergies and learn from radically different epistemological and ontological
frameworks. Moreover, indigenous discourses often have the added value of being radically
pluralistic and ecocentric as opposed to the anthropocentrism and ethnocentrism of most
western environmental discourses (Kothari et al., 2019). They thus open up entirely new
forms of conceiving democracy, waste, well-being, society and nature (Calisto Friant and
Langmore, 2015; D’Alisa et al., 2014; Kothari et al., 2019).
Buddhism, Taoism and Confucianism also have strong ecological components, which
have not been sufficiently related to the CE (Subramanian et al., 2018). Confucianism and
Taoism played a key role in the early adoption of the CE in China as part of the creation of
a “harmonious society” and an “ecological civilization” (Jin, 2008; Naustdalslid, 2014). Japan
has also been implementing circular policies since the early 2000s through its innovative
“Fundamental Plan for Establishing a Sound Material-Cycle Society” (Hara and Yabar, 2012;
Hotta, 2011; Takahashi, 2020) and more recently with the “regional circular and ecological
sphere” policy, which addresses key territorial and socio-ecological synergies (Japanese
Ministry of the Environment, 2018). The Buddhist-inspired Gross National Happiness Index
(GNI) of Bhutan also deserves greater attention as it shows how new metrics that go
beyond the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) can be developed and adapted to include key
circularity criteria (Rinzin et al., 2007; Verma, 2017). Yet, more remains to be written on the
philosophical components of a CE and how they can relate to different worldviews.
Overall, the research on degrowth and non-western visions of sustainability could bring key
insights into the first and most important “loops” in the CE value-retention hierarchy: refuse,
reduce, reuse and repair (Reike et al., 2018a), all of which can lead to the sustainable slowing
of resource cycles (Homrich et al., 2018).

44

A Typology of Circular Economy Discourses

2.3.2 Timeline of circularity thinking
A timeline of CE thinking and its related concepts, based on a broad understanding of the
EC as an umbrella concept (Homrich et al., 2018), is presented in Figure 2.3. The timeline
builds on the categorizations proposed by Reike et al. (2018) and by Blomsma and Brennan
(2017), which were expanded to include a plurality of concepts from western and nonwestern perspectives alike. Figure 2.3 thus allows us to better situate the concept, both
in its rich historical origins and in its complex theoretical diversity. This helps illustrate
the manifold conceptualizations of circularity as well as the reformist vs transformational
circularity schools of thought, which shape the current debate on the topic (Reike et al.,
2018a). The 72 concepts in this timeline are further analysed in sections 2.4.1 and 2.4.2 to
classify them based on their key socio-ecological considerations and to examine how they
address the complex challenges that the CE concept is presently facing.
The first period is a preamble stage (1945 to 1980), where discussions regarding resource
limits and the ecological impacts of human activities became widespread thanks to key
publications such as “The Tragedy of the Commons” (Hardin, 1968), “the Limits to Growth” (D.
Meadows et al., 1972), and “Overshoot” (Catton, 1980). This phase is also ripe with a diversity
of transformative proposals from various perspectives including Gandhian economics
(Kumarappa, 1945), Buddhist economics (Schumacher, 1973), socialism (Commoner, 1971),
anarchism (Illich, 1973), ecological economics (Daly, 1977; Georgescu-Roegen, 1971),
political ecology (Gorz, 1980), and eco-design (Papanek, 1972). During this time, Boulding
(1966) wrote “The Economics of the Coming Spaceship Earth”, which is often considered to
be the first reference to a CE-like system (Antikainen et al., 2018; Geissdoerfer et al., 2017;
Murray et al., 2017; Prieto-Sandoval et al., 2018; Winans et al., 2017). He calls for a “spaceman
economy”, where “all outputs from consumption would constantly be recycled to become
inputs for production” (Boulding, 1966, p5). These concepts had a strong understanding of
planetary limits and gave great attention to all the issues discussed in section 2.3.1, including
decoupling (challenge 1), resource trade-offs (challenge 2), rebound effects (challenge 3),
social justice (challenge 4) and alternative visions of sufficiency (challenge 5).
During this preamble stage, a body of technical literature on waste management was also
developed, which represents Circularity 1.0 approaches that deal with waste as a problem
to be managed through end-of-pipe technologies (Reike et al., 2018a). This is thus when
the first waste management and recycling systems were developed for various waste
streams (Reike et al., 2018a; Takahashi, 2020). These concepts were mostly focused on
specific technological innovations and thus didn’t address the main challenges evidenced
in section 2.3.1.

45

2

Waste-Water Treatment
(Holcomb,1970)

46

New holistic
First holistic Circularity
Circularity views
frameworks
Rio
Declaration
on
Blue
Economy
Circular Economy (Pearce and
Environment and
(Pauli, 2010)
Turner, 1989)
Development
(UN, 1992)
Material Efficiency
Eco-design /Design for environ(Allwood et al., 2011)
ment (Ryan et al., 1992)
Regenerative design
(Lyle, 1994)
Third Industrial
Cyclic Economy (Tibbs, 1993)
Revolution (Rifkin,
Natural Capitalism
2013)
Industrial Metabolism (Ayres and
(Hawken et al., 1999)
Simonis, 1994)
Eco-system Economy
Sound Material-Cycle
(Scharmer and Kaufer,
Cleaner Production (Baas, 1995)
Society (Government of 2013)
Japan, 2000)
Reverse Logistics (Rogers and
Regenerative Capitalism
Tibben-Lembke,1998)
Cyclical Economy
(Fullerton, 2015)
Eco-industrial parks and networks (Young et al., 2001)
Sharing Economy
(Côté and Cohen-Rosenthal, 1998)
Materials Matter
(Frenken, 2017)
(Geiser, 2001)
Biomimicry (Benyus, 1998)
Doughnut Economics
Cradle to Cradle
(Raworth, 2017)
Product Service System
(McDonough and
(Goedkoop et al., 1999)
Braungart, 2002)
Symbiotic Economy
(Delannoy, 2017)
Extended Producer Responsibility
The Natural Step
(Lindhqvist, 2000)
(Robert, 2002)
Social Circular Economy
(Social Circular
Industrial Symbiosis
The Biosphere Rules
Economy, 2017)
(Chertow, 2000)
(Unruh, 2008)
Spiral Economy
Closed-loop Supply Chain
Performance Economy
(Ashby et al., 2019)
(Guide et al., 2003)
(Stahel, 2010)
Coviability (Barrière et
Biobased Economy / Bioeconomy
al., 2019)
(OECD, 2004)
Industrial Ecology (Frosch and
Gallopoulos, 1989)

Excitement Period
1980–2010

Ecological Swaraj
(Kothari et al., 2014)
Suma Qamaña / Vivir
Bien (Artaraz and
Calestani, 2015)

Laudato Si'
(Pope Francis, 2015)
Transition design
(Irwin, 2015)

Convivalism
(Caillé, 2019)

Voluntary Simplicity
(Trainer and Alexander,
2019)

Permacircular Economy
(Bourg, 2018)

Post-growth
(Jackson, 2016)

Radical Pluralism /
Pluriverse
(Kothari et al., 2019)

Buddhist, Confucian and
Taoist ecology
(Arler, 2018)

Ecological Civilization
(Zhang et al., 2011)

Economy for the
Common Good
(Felber, 2015)

Ubuntu (Shumba, 2011)

Eco-socialism
(Löwy, 2011)

Non-western visions of
Circularity
Buen Vivir/ Sumark
Kawsay (Government of
Ecuador, 2008)

Degrowth
(Latouche, 2009)

Transformational
views of Circularity
Transition Movement
(Hopkins, 2008)

Validity Challenge Period
2010-present

20 It is worth noting that the timeline does not strictly follow the dates proposed by Reike, et al. (2018) or Blomsma and Brennan (2017) as it is a new proposition. Moreover, each
time period overlaps, showing that ideological phases do not necessarily have strict start and end date but rather gradients with moments of prominence and decline. An
interactive version of this timeline with additionally suggested concepts is available in the following web-page: https://cresting.hull.ac.uk/impact/circularity-timeline/

FIGURE 2.3 | Timeline of Circularity Concepts20

Overshoot (Catton 1980)

Deep Ecology (Næss and
Rothernberg 1989, based on
1976 book in Norwegian)

Décroissance (Gorz, 1980, first
published in French in 1975)

Permaculture (Mollison and
Holmgren, 1978)

Steady-state economics
(Daly, 1977)

Conviviality (Illich, 1973)

Small is Beautiful
(Schumacher, 1973)

Ecological Design
(Papanek, 1972)

Limits to Growth
(Meadows et al., 1972)

Social Ecology (Bookchin, 1971)

The Closing Circle
(Commoner, 1971)

The Economics of the Coming
Solid Waste Management
Spaceship Earth (Boulding, 1966) and Recycling (Levick and
Davies, 1975)
The tragedy of the Commons
(Hardin, 1968)
Bio-Digestion
(Hughes, 1975)
The Population Bomb
(Ehrlich, 1968)
Energy Recovery
(Boyle, 1977)
The entropy law and the
economic process
(Georgescu-Roegen, 1971)

Gandhian economics
(Kumarappa, 1945)

Preamble Period
1945-1980

Circularity 3.2 Transformational views of
Circularity and visions of the Global South

Circularity 3.0: Integrated socio-economic approaches to resources, consumption and waste

Circularity 2.0: Connecting Input and Circularity 3.1 Reformist views on the Circularity
Output in Strategies for Eco-Efficiency

Circularity 1.0 and 2.0: Techno-fixes to waste

Circularity 1.0: Dealing with
Waste

2

Precursors to circularity

Chapter 2

A Typology of Circular Economy Discourses

Circularity 2.0, represents the beginning of an “excitement period” (1980-2010) (Blomsma
and Brennan, 2017, p608), where a diversity of innovative ideas start to see waste as a
valuable input for other processes (Reike et al., 2018a). It is the time when the concept of
a CE was first coined by Pearce and Turner (1989) and when many related ideas, policies
and business models emerged, including “industrial ecology” (Frosch and Gallopoulos,
1989), “industrial symbiosis” (Chertow, 2000), “product-service system” (Goedkoop et al.,
1999), “reverse logistics” (Rogers and Tibben-Lembke, 1998), and “extended producer
responsibility” (Lindhqvist, 2000). These ideas often take inspiration from nature to build new
technologies and innovations that connect the output and input sides of the economy and
make industries work like natural ecosystems. Since this period coincides with the growth
of neoliberalism, most of these ideas were established and implemented through marketdriven approaches and public-private partnerships (Monsaingeon, 2017) which didn’t give
much attention to the main challenges discussed in section 2.3.1, except for challenge 2 on
the resource nexus.
With Circularity 3.0 (1990-present) the beginning of a comprehensive socio-economic
approach to waste, resources, production and consumption emerged; which often builds
on the objectives of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (UN, 1992).
During this period the original CE concept was further developed by new ideas including
“the natural step” (Robèrt, 2002), “the performance economy” (Stahel, 2010), “cradle to
cradle” (McDonough and Braungart, 2002), and “natural capitalism” (Hawken et al., 1999).
However, from about 2010 onwards, it is also a “validity challenge period” (Blomsma and
Brennan, 2017, p.609), where many inconsistencies and conceptual challenges of the CE
must be resolved. From this point, the concept can either cohere, by resolving its theoretical
challenges, collapse, as inconsistencies become insurmountable, or persist as a contention,
as different positions end up “agreeing to disagree” (Blomsma and Brennan, 2017, p.609).
In this critical moment, two broad movements of the CE concept can be seen: first,
Circularity 3.1, which represents reformist discourses that operate within the boundaries
of the capitalist system (e.g., Allwood et al., 2011; Fullerton, 2015; Pauli, 2010; Rifkin, 2013),
and second, Circularity 3.2, which represents transformational discourses seeking wholesale
transformation of the socio-economic order (e.g., Arnsperger and Bourg, 2017; Caillé, 2019;
Kothari et al., 2014; Latouche, 2018; Trainer and Alexander, 2019). Both discourses include
issues of planetary boundaries, the rebound effect, social justice, and good governance
(as discussed in challenges 2, 3 and 4), however, they vary in their views regarding the
capacity of capitalism to overcome resource limits and decouple ecological degradation
from economic growth (as evidenced in challenge 1) as well as topics of epistemological
and ontological pluralism (challenge 5) (please see the supplementary materials of Calisto
Friant et al. (2020) for more details on each concept in the timeline).

47

2

Chapter 2

2.4

Synthesis and Reflection

Now that the core challenges, the conceptual origins and the diversity of the CE have
been reviewed, the next section synthesizes and reflects on these findings to analyse and
differentiate the plurality of circularity discourses. The conceptual challenges highlighted
in section 2.3.1 are an effective starting point to unpack this diversity. They are thus the
basis used for distinguishing circularity discourses according to their level of complexity
(section 2.4.1). This leads to the circularity discourse typology which allows for a clearer
differentiation, navigation and comprehension of this contested paradigm (section 2.4.2).

2.4.1 Classification of circularity discourses according to their level of complexity

2

Table 2.1 shows the different levels of complexity of circularity discourses depending on the
extent to which they address the challenges reviewed in section 2.3.1:
•

•

•

•
•
•

Columns (a) and (b), represent spatial and temporal scales, the importance of which
was evidenced in challenges 1 and 3 discussing global resource limits and the rebound
effect.
Column (c) shows which pillars of sustainability (people, planet, prosperity)21 are
included. The significance of this was seen in challenge 4, where the importance of
social justice and political considerations was highlighted.
Column (d) distinguishes ontological (anthropocentric vs ecocentric) and
epistemological perspectives (ethnocentric vs plural), which were discussed in
challenge 5.
Column (e) relates to the complex interlinkages of the resource nexus, which was
discussed in challenge 2.
Column (f ) refers to the questions of economic growth, capitalism and decoupling,
which were analysed in challenge 1.
Columns (g) and (h) reflect the core objectives and narratives, and column (i) shows
where each circularity concept group from the timeline (Figure 2.3) fits.

21 The people, planet, prosperity (PPP) framework represent a broad consensus on the core pillars of sustainability
as evidenced by the review of Vermeulen (2018).

48

Circularity vision

Circular Society

49

4.

5.

Complexity level

b)
Spatial
scale

Long term: Macro-scale:
1 to 2
planet Earth
generations
(20-50
years)

Very long
Macro-scale:
term:
planet Earth
multiple
generations
(beyond 50
years)

a)
Temporal
scale

People,
Planet,
Prosperity

People,
Planet,
Prosperity

Anthropocentric
and
ethnocentric

Ecocentric
and
plural

c)
d)
Sustainability
ontology
factors
and
included
epistemology

TABLE 2.1 | Circularity discourse complexity.

Balancing trade-offs
and synergies to keep
energy, biodiversity
and material resources
within safe planetary
limits

Changing
consumption and
production patterns
to keep energy,
biodiversity and
material resources
within safe planetary
limits

e)
Perspective
on the resource
nexus

Believe in the
possibility of
decoupling and
the sustainability
of capitalism

Sceptical
regarding the
possibility of
decoupling and
the sustainability
of capitalism

f)
Views on
capitalism
and decoupling

Humans must ensure Mainly
justice, fairness and
Circularity 3.1
participation in the
sustainable stewardship
of the earth, even if that
entails redistributing
and changing
consumption patterns

Preserving social
well-being and
the biophysical
health of the earth
system in line with
the SDGs

Mainly
Circularity
3.2 and most
Precursors
The earth is borrowed
from future
generations of living
beings, humans must
preserve, respect,
restore and share
it in a fair manner,
even if that entails
changing lifestyles and
consumption patterns

Maintaining socioecological health
and wellbeing for
present and future
generations of
human and nonhuman life

i)
Circularity
concept
group

h)
Narrative

g)
Main goal/
objective

A Typology of Circular Economy Discourses

2

Circularity vision

Circular Economy

Meso-scale
(country,
region,
industrial
park, city)

Micro-scale
(single
product,
service, or
firm)

Short term:
single
product life
cycle (1 to 2
1. years)

Long term:
Macro-scale:
one
planet Earth
generation
(10-25 years)

b)
Spatial
scale

Mid-term:
1 to 2
government
planning
2. cycles (5 to
10 years)

3.

Complexity level

50

Planet,
Prosperity

Planet,
Prosperity

Planet,
Prosperity

Anthropocentric
and
ethnocentric

Anthropocentric
and
ethnocentric

Anthropocentric
and
ethnocentric

c)
d)
Sustainability
ontology
factors
and
included
epistemology

Optimising material
and energy resource
flows in product
design.

Optimizing and
securing material,
natural and energy
resources, especially
for critical raw
materials

Balancing trade-offs
and synergies to keep
energy, biodiversity
and material resources
within safe planetary
limits

e)
Perspective
on the resource
nexus

Believe in the
possibility of
decoupling and
the sustainability
of capitalism

Believe in the
possibility of
decoupling and
the sustainability
of capitalism

Believe in the
possibility of
decoupling and
the sustainability
of capitalism

f)
Views on
capitalism
and decoupling

Capturing
opportunities
to lower both
environmental
impacts and
economic costs.

Securing and
preserving critical
resources and
materials

Maintaining the
biophysical health
of the earth
system

g)
Main goal/
objective

2

a)
Temporal
scale

i)
Circularity
concept
group

Mainly
Circularity 1.0
and 2.0

Ensuring optimum
Mainly
resource efficiency
Circularity 1.0
through
and 2.0
eco-innovation leads
to win-win solutions
that reduce ecological
harm and increase
economic value

Strategically
maximising ecoefficiency and
balancing resource
use is necessary to
maintain resource
security and ensure
geopolitical stability

Reducing humanity’s Mainly
overall ecological
Circularity 2.0
footprint and balancing
resource limits and
constraints is key to
ensuring the stability
of the biosphere and
long-term economic
prosperity

h)
Narrative

Chapter 2

A Typology of Circular Economy Discourses

To distinguish discourses that go beyond market-based solutions and economic
considerations and see circularity as a holistic social transformation, the term circular
society is proposed; this applies to complexity levels 4 and 5. A circular society defines
discourses with a vision of circularity where not only resources are circulated in sustainable
loops, but also wealth, knowledge, technology and power are circulated and redistributed
throughout society (see Figure 4). These discourses thus comprehensively include the three
pillars of sustainability and see circularity as a holistic transition, where issues of political
empowerment and social justice also have to be addressed. The term circular economy, in
contrast to this, focuses on circulating resources alone and applies to complexity levels 1
to 3, which largely deal with circularity through a technical lens of ecological and material
efficiency alone. Moreover, when discussing CE as a general umbrella concept, this article
uses the term circularity to comprehensively include all its historically related concepts and
ideas (as seen in Figure 2.3). Considering the importance of “policy labels, keywords and
framing” for sustainability transitions (Silva et al., 2016, p224), these differentiations can help
acknowledge and address the complex ecological, sociological and political implications of
a circular future.
Material and Energy
Resources

Material and Energy
Resources

Circular Economy

Circular Society

Wealth, Power, Technology
and Knowledge
FIGURE 2.4 | Conceptual Differentiation between Circular Economy and Circular Society.

2.4.2 Development of a circularity discourse typology
While many are proposing a “deliberately vague but uncontroversial” (Lazarevic and Valve,
2017, p60) discourse on the CE as a strategy to gain widespread support in the short term,
this could lead to a depoliticised CE, which does little towards tackling the systemic socioecological challenges of the Anthropocene (Korhonen et al., 2018b; Millar et al., 2019;
Valenzuela and Böhm, 2017). Thus, it is key to propose alternative visions, which tackle the
key conceptual challenges evidenced in section 2.3. As Latouche (2018) rightly pointed
out, the core challenge for global sustainability is to “decolonize the imaginary” and allow
other futures to emerge. In the same manner, Korten (2015) speaks of “changing the story to
change the future”, Escobar (2018) argues for a “pluriversal imagination” needed for entirely

51

2

Chapter 2

different forms of “world-making”, and Feola (2019b) calls for the “unmaking of capitalism”
to “make space” for a diversity of alternatives. A typology of circularity discourses must thus
not only help better distinguish different circular discourses but also allow for an expansion
of the imaginary regarding other possible circular futures.
While other classifications of environmental discourses have been developed previously, none
has been specifically designed to comprehensively distinguish circularity discourses. Other
environmental discourse typologies include Dryzek’s (2013), which divides reformist versus
radical positions with prosaic versus imaginative positions leading to four core discourses:
environmental problem solving (prosaic and reformist), green radicalism (imaginative and
radical), survivalism (prosaic and radical), and sustainability (imaginative and reformist).

2

Schwarz and Thompson (1990) build on the cultural theory of risk by adding a vision
of the fragility of nature to the divide between cultural rationalities This leads to four
core environmental discourses: fatalists, who see nature as capricious (unpredictable
and uncontrollable), individualist, who see nature as benign (resilient and abundant),
egalitarians, who see nature as ephemeral (fragile and limited), and hierarchists, who see
nature as tolerant (resilient but only up to some extent) (Schwarz and Thompson, 1990).
Mann (2018) differentiates between prophets who call for urgent cutbacks in consumption
to stay within planetary limits and wizards who propose optimistic technological solutions.
Moreover, Audet (2016) distinguishes between localist and technocentrist transition
discourses, the first being focused on scientific innovation, and the latter, on bottom-up
social transformation.
Nevertheless, none of the abovementioned discourse typologies applies perfectly to
circularity, as they are either too narrow, leaving some circularity discourses out; or too
general, and do not allow for a clear differentiation of the circularity concepts presented in
Figure 2.3. The typology of CE discourses presented in Figure 2.5 draws inspiration from the
division of environmental discourses developed by the above authors and adapts them to
the CE by integrating the results of this research.
The first typological axis was developed from challenge 4, on social justice and governance,
which many authors have identified as one of the most important issues for a circular future
(Geissdoerfer et al., 2017; Hobson, 2019; Korhonen et al., 2018a; Millar et al., 2019; Moreau et
al., 2017; Schröder et al., 2019a; Temesgen et al., 2019). This axis thus builds on the distinction
between circular society and circular economy presented in section 2.4.1 by dividing holistic
from segmented discourses. Holistic discourses comprehensively integrate the social,
ecological and political considerations of circularity (like circular society visions). Segmented
discourses, on the other hand, have a homogeneous perspective and a uniform focus on
only economic and technical components of circularity (like circular economy visions).
This differentiation is similar to Dryzek’s (2013) distinction between prosaic vs imaginative
discourses but it is specifically focused on the circularity challenges reviewed in this article,
and especially the distinction between circular economy and circular society concepts.
52

A Typology of Circular Economy Discourses

The second typological axis was developed from challenge 1 on capitalism, economic
growth and decoupling (column (f ) in Table 2.1). Recent research has found that this could
be the most crucial element to transition discourses, as it deals with the ability, or inability,
of the current socio-economic system to prevent ecological collapse by decoupling
economic growth from environmental degradation (eco-economic decoupling)22 (Feola,
2019a; Fergnani, 2019; Giampietro, 2019; Hickel and Kallis, 2019; Parrique et al., 2019). The
second typological differentiation thus distinguishes whether discourses are optimist
or sceptical about the capacity of technology and innovation to overcome the major
ecological challenges of the Anthropocene before an irreversible socio-ecological collapse
occurs. This differentiation is similar to the distinction between Mann’s (2018) prophets and
wizards, but it adds a stronger systemic and political dimension to it.
Approach to social, economic, environmental and political considerations
Holistic

Segmented

Optimist

Techncentric Circular Economy

• Assumptions: reformed form of capitalism is
compatible with sustainability and sociotechnical innovations can enable ecoeconomic decoupling to prevent ecological
collapse.
• Goal: economic prosperity and human wellbeing within the biophysical boundaries of the
earth.
• Means: technological breakthroughs, social
innovations and new business models that
improve ecological health, resource security,
and material prosperity for all.

Transformational Circular Society

Sceptical

Technological innovation and ecological collapse

Reformist Circular Society

• Assumptions: capitalism is compatible with
sustainability and technological innovation
can enable eco-economic decoupling to
prevent ecological collapse.
• Goal: sustainable human progress and
prosperity without negative environmental
externalities.
• Means: economic innovations, new business
models and unprecedented breakthroughs in
CE technologies for the closing of resource
loops with optimum economic value creation.

Fortress Circular Economy

• Assumptions: capitalism is incompatible with
sustainability and socio-technical innovation
cannot bring absolute eco-economic
decoupling to prevent ecological collapse.
• Goal: a world of conviviality and frugal
abundance for all, while fairly distributing the
biophysical resources of the earth.
• Means: complete reconﬁguration of the
current socio-political system and a shift away
from productivist and anthropocentric
worldviews to drastically reduce humanity’s
ecological footprint and ensure that everyone
can live meaningfully, and in harmony with the
earth.

• Assumptions: there is no alternative to
capitalism and socio-technical innovation
cannot bring absolute eco-economic
decoupling to prevent ecological collapse.
• Goal: maintain geostrategic resource security
and earth system stability in global conditions
where widespread resource scarcity and
human overpopulation cannot provide for all.
• Means: innovative technologies and business
models combined with rationalized resource
use, imposed frugality and strict migration and
population controls.

FIGURE 2.5 | Circularity discourse typology.

22 Eco-economic decoupling is defined here as the absolute decoupling of environmental degradation from
economic growth, meaning growing GDP while reducing absolute environmental impacts from production
and consumption activities (Kjaer et al., 2019).

53

2

Chapter 2

2

Reformist Circular Society: Holistic and optimistic discourses propose a mix of behavioural
and technological change, leading to an abundant, fair, and sustainable future where scarcity
and environmental overshoot has been dealt with by impressive social, economic, industrial
and environmental innovations. While they believe important socio-cultural change is
necessary, and new forms of public participation and inclusion are needed, they do not
see a fundamental contradiction between capitalism and sustainability. Reformist Circular
Society discourses thus argue that the current system can be deeply reformed toward
circularity and believe that social and economic innovation can lead to a sufficient level of
eco-economic decoupling to prevent a widespread ecological collapse. Reformist Circular
Society discourses promote a variety of circular solutions such as industrial symbiosis, PSS,
ecodesign and biomimicry, and they integrate the 3 main components of sustainability
in their discourse, which is often framed around achieving the sustainable development
goals while remaining within safe planetary boundaries. This discourse type considers
solutions throughout all the value retention options of the CE, yet it gives a stronger focus
to intermediate loops such as R3 repair, R4 refurbish, R5 remanufacture, R6 re-purpose, and
R7 recycle. All Circularity 3.1 concepts fall within this discourse type, as well as the positions
of various NGOs and non-profits like Circle Economy (Verstraeten-Jochemsen et al., 2018)
and the Club of Rome (von Weizsäcker and Wijkman, 2017) as well as cities like Amsterdam
(as evidenced by Fratini et al., 2019). Reformist Circular Society has a lot in common with
Dryzek’s (2013) sustainability category of discourses. The name of this discourse type derives
from Reike et al.’s (2018) reformist CE distinction combined with the circular society concept
as described in section 2.4.1.
Transformational Circular Society: Holistic and sceptical discourses propose an entirely
transformed social system where individuals gain a renewed and harmonious connection
with the Earth and their communities. A general economic downscaling and a philosophy
of sufficiency leads to simpler, slower and more meaningful lives. Local production is
emphasized, especially through cooperative and collaborative economic structures and
by using agroecological techniques and open-source innovations and technologies that
do not harm the biosphere nor deplete its limited resources, such as 3D printing, solar
panels, wind turbines, cooperative P2P platforms, etc. This discourse type thus gives a
stronger focus to the shorter loops in the CE value retention hierarchy, especially R0 refuse,
R1 reduce, R2 reuse/resell, R3 repair, R4 refurbish, R5 remanufacture, and R6 re-purpose.
Transformational Circular Society discourses also place a core emphasis on changing
materialistic, anthropocentric, patriarchal, individualistic and ethnocentric worldviews to
more holistic, plural, and inclusive ones. They also propose to redistribute global resources
from nations and social sectors that grossly overshoot their ecological footprint to those
that do not. Transformational Circular Society discourses emphasize direct participation
and citizen inclusion in the democratic construction of the future, often through novel
mechanisms of bottom-up governance. All Circularity 3.2 concepts and most Precursors fall

54

A Typology of Circular Economy Discourses

in the Transformational Circular Society discourse type, as well as various social movements,
such as the Great Transition Initiative and the Transition Towns Network (as evidenced
by Feola and Jaworska, 2019), local bottom-up circular initiatives such as De Ceuvel in
Amsterdam (as evidenced by Hobson, 2019) and R-Urbain in Paris (as evidenced by Marin
and De Meulder, 2018), and many indigenous movements form the Global South (Kothari et
al., 2019). These discourses are similar to Dryzek’s (2013) green radicalism as well as Schwarz
and Thompson’s (1990) egalitarians. The name of this discourse type derives from Reike et
al.’s (2018) transformational CE distinction combined with the circular society concept as
described in section 2.4.1.
Technocentric Circular Economy: Segmented and optimistic discourses propose an
era of green growth and technological advancements, which allow for increasing levels
of prosperity while reducing humanity’s ecological footprint. These discourses thus expect
that circular innovations can lead to an absolute eco-economic decoupling to prevent
ecological collapse. To do so many win-win solutions are promoted such as PSS, EPRs,
biomimicry reverse logistics, industrial symbiosis, remanufacturing, refurbishing, big data,
and eco-design, as well as controversial innovations such as carbon capture and storage,
artificial intelligence, geoengineering, and synthetic biology. This discourse type thus
gives a stronger focus to the larger loops in the CE value retention hierarchy, especially R4
refurbish, R5 remanufacture, R6 re-purpose, R7 recycle, R8 recover energy and R9 re-mine.
These discourses are common in European government policies (as evidenced by Colombo
et al., 2019; Kaźmierczyk, 2018; Pardo and Schweitzer, 2018; Repo et al., 2018; Rijnhout et
al., 2018), CE development plans in cities such as London (as evidenced by Fratini et al.,
2019), corporate strategies such as Apple’s (as evidenced by Valenzuela and Böhm, 2017;
Vonk, 2018), business consultancies such as McKinsey and some international organizations
including the World Economic Forum, the International Resource Panel, and the OECD (IRP,
2019; OECD, 2018; WEF et al., 2016). These institutions focus mostly on new technologies,
innovations and business models as avenues for green growth, without mentioning
social justice and participatory governance. Circularity 1.0 and 2.0 concepts fall within the
Technocentric Circular Economy discourse type, which has a lot in common with Audet’s
(2016) technocentrist discourses. The name, of this discourse type, in fact, derives from
Audet’s (2016) technocentrists, combined with the circular economy concept as described
in section 2.4.1.
Fortress Circular Economy: Segmented and sceptical discourses have a vision of a future
where scarce resources, overpopulation and biophysical limits require strong cohesive
measures. These discourses thus seek to impose sufficiency, population controls and
resource efficiency from the top down to rationally confront global scarcity and limits, yet
they do not deal with questions of wealth distribution and social justice. This is evident in
the texts of precursors such as Catton (1980), Ehrlich (1968), and Hardin (1968), all of which
build on Malthusian theories of overpopulation and resource scarcity to advocate for strong
population control and materials efficiency strategies. This discourse type thus considers
55

2

Chapter 2

2

solutions throughout the entire CE value retention hierarchy (R0-R9). These positions have
often been criticised as sexist, elitist, and ethnocentric as they involve white, male, scientists
from the Global North imposing sufficiency and limits to populations, which for the most
part, had very little to do with the crisis at hand (Dryzek, 2013; Fressoz and Bonneuil, 2016).
These types of discourses have also historically existed in authoritarian regimes such as
Nazi Germany and the German Democratic Republic, which developed “Kreislaufökonomie”
(circulatory economy) policies to conserve and recycle resources in conditions of
geopolitical conflict, economic strife and resource scarcity (Corvellec et al., 2020). More
recently, the ecological concerns and resource limits of the 21st century have led to a
growing “disaster capitalism”23, in which investors, entrepreneurs and venture capitalists see
green solutions and business models as new opportunities for capital expansion (Fletcher,
2019, 2012). Many states and corporations are thus already using a framing of scarcity to
grab land and resources in the Global South and develop infrastructures and technologies
to ensure resource security (Cavanagh and Benjaminsen, 2018; Mehta et al., 2019). There
is also a growing number of NGOs, think tanks and governments using a discourse of
climate change, scarcity and overpopulation to protect geopolitical power, resources and
prosperity from migrant people from the Global South (Hendrixson and Hartmann, 2019).
This narrative is clear in a Pentagon-commissioned report arguing that wealthy nations
may “build defensive fortresses around their countries […] to hold back unwanted starving
immigrants” and preserve their resources (Schwartz and Randall, 2003 p18). Fortress Circular
Economy discourses are similar to Schwarz and Thompson’s (1990) fatalists, and Dryzek’s
(2013) survivalists. Moreover, like fatalists and survivalists, the proponents of this discourse
type do not always engage in mainstream debate since they have rather cynically realist
visions. Yet, they might often be the underlying focus of many business and government
discussions on circularity, especially when they are based on a narrative of geopolitical
resource security, overpopulation and economic competitiveness.
Table 2.2 presents the position of each concept from the timeline in relation to the
discourse typology24. The most widespread discourse in the literature is Transformational
Circular Society (42% of reviewed concepts), followed by Reformist Circular Society (28% of
reviewed concepts), and Technocentric Circular Economy (26% of reviewed concepts) and
then by Fortress Circular Economy (4% of reviewed concepts). On the other hand, revising
120 academic, government and practitioner definitions of the CE reveals that 101 of them
(84%) fall in the Technocentric Circular Economy discourse type, 14 in Reformist Circular
23 The term “disaster capitalism” originates from Naomi Klein, which defines it as “orchestrated raids on the public
sphere in the wake of catastrophic events, combined with the treatment of disasters as exciting marketing
opportunities” (cited in Fletcher, 2012, p99) this crisis-driven narrative have been used to control natural
resources and commodify nature (Fletcher, 2019, 2012).
24 It is worth noting that many concepts have elements of various different circularity discourse types and are
thus sometimes hard to place in a single area. Moreover, different authors might write about these concepts
in different ways and with different interpretations. Table 2.2 thus puts these concepts where they fit the most,
but some concepts are somewhat in between, such as Doughnut Economics and Eco-systems economy
which sit between TCS and RCS.

56

A Typology of Circular Economy Discourses
TABLE 2.2 | Concepts within each circularity discourse type.

Reformist Circular Society
(20 concepts)

N. 13 precursor concepts:
1. Gandhian economics (Kumarappa, 1945)
2. The Economics of the Coming Spaceship
Earth (Boulding, 1966)
3. The entropy law and the economic
process (Georgescu-Roegen, 1971)
4. The Closing Circle (Commoner, 1971)
5. Social Ecology (Bookchin, 1971)
6. Ecological Design (Papanek, 1972)
7. Limits to Growth (D. Meadows et al., 1972)
8. Small is Beautiful (Schumacher, 1973)
9. Conviviality (Illich, 1973)
10. Steady-state economics (Daly, 1977)
11. Permaculture (Mollison and Holmgren,
1978)
12. Décroissance (Gorz, 1980)
13. Deep Ecology (Næss and Rothernberg
1989)
N. 17 Circularity 3.2 concepts:
1. Transition Movement (Hopkins, 2008)

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

N. 15 concepts from Circularity 2.0:
1. Industrial Ecology (Frosch and
Gallopoulos, 1989)
2. Circular Economy (Pearce and Turner,
1989)
3. Eco-design /Design for environment
(Ryan et al., 1992)
4. Cyclic Economy (Tibbs, 1993)
5. Industrial Metabolism (Ayres and
Simonis, 1994)
6. Cleaner Production (Baas, 1995)
7. Reverse Logistics (Rogers and TibbenLembke, 1998)
8. Eco-industrial parks and networks (Côté
and Cohen-Rosenthal, 1998)

9. Biomimicry (Benyus, 1998)
10. Product Service System (Goedkoop et al., 1999)
11. Extended Producer Responsibility (Lindhqvist,
2000)
12. Industrial Symbiosis (Chertow, 2000)
13. Closed-loop Supply Chain (Guide et al., 2003)
14. Biobased Economy / Bioeconomy (OECD, 2004)
15. The Biosphere Rules (Unruh, 2008)

Fortress
Circular
Economy
(3 concepts)

10. Blue economy (Pauli, 2010)
11. Material Efficiency (Allwood et al., 2011)
12. Third industrial revolution (Rifkin, 2013)
13. Eco-system economy (Scharmer and Kaufer,
2013)
14. Regenerative capitalism (Fullerton, 2015)
15. Sharing Economy (Frenken, 2017)
16. Doughnut Economics (Raworth, 2017)
17. Symbiotic Economy (Delannoy, 2017)
18. Social Circular Economy (Social Circular
Economy, 2017)
19. Spiral Economy (Ashby et al., 2019)
20. Coviability (Barrière et al., 2019)

Transformational Circular Society
(30 concepts)

Concepts from the Timeline
N. 20 Circularity 3.1 concepts:
1. Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development (UN, 1992)
2. Regenerative design (Lyle, 1994)
3. Natural Capitalism (Hawken et al., 1999)
4. Sound Material-Cycle Society
(Government of Japan, 2000)
5. Cyclical Economy (Young et al., 2001)
6. Materials Matter (Geiser, 2001)
7. Cradle to Cradle (McDonough and
Braungart, 2002)
8. The Natural Step (Robèrt, 2002)
9. Performance Economy (Stahel, 2010)

Technocentric Circular Economy
(19 concepts)

Discourse

Degrowth (Latouche, 2009)
Eco-socialism (Löwy, 2011)
Laudato Si’ (Pope Francis, 2015)
Transition design (Irwin, 2015)
Economy for the Common Good (Felber, 2015)
Post-growth (Jackson, 2016)
Permacircular Economy (Bourg, 2018),
Voluntary Simplicity (Trainer and Alexander,
2019)
10. Convivalism (Caillé, 2019)
11. Buen Vivir/ Sumark Kawsay (Government of
Ecuador, 2008)
12. Ubuntu (Shumba, 2011)
13. Ecological Civilization (Zhang et al., 2011)
14. Ecological Swaraj (Kothari et al., 2014)
15. Suma Qamaña / Vivir Bien (Artaraz and
Calestani, 2015)
16. Buddhist, Confucian and Taoist ecology (Arler,
2018)
17. Radical Pluralism/ Pluriverse (Kothari et al., 2019)

N. 4 Circularity 1.0concepts:
1. Waste-Water Treatment (Holcomb, 1970)
2. Integrated Solid Waste Management and
Recycling (Levick and Davies, 1975)
3. Bio-Digestion (Hughes, 1975)
4. Energy Recovery (Boyle, 1977)

N. 3 precursor concepts:
1. The tragedy of the Commons (Hardin, 1968)
2. The Population Bomb (Ehrlich, 1968)
3. Overshoot (Catton, 1980)

57

2

Chapter 2

Society (12%), 3 in Fortress Circular Economy (2.5%), and 2 in the Transformational Circular
Society (1.5%) (see supplementary materials of Calisto Friant et al. (2020) for details). There
is thus a discrepancy between the diversity of holistic CE-related concepts in the literature,
and the most common definitions of the CE term, which are generally situated within
segmented and optimist discourse types. The present status quo of the CE discourse is thus
in the Technocentric Circular Economy discourse type, despite the significant literature on
other circular discourses. This is in line with the results of D’Amato et al. (2019), which found
that academics had more degrowth or post-growth oriented perspectives on circularity
than mainstream CE propositions (D’Amato et al., 2019).

2

It is also worth noting that there has been a shift in circularity discourses through time. A
plurality of Transformational Circular Society discourses prevailed in the 1960s and 1970s,
as most precursors had a strong understanding of planetary limits and comprehensively
addressed the main social and systemic challenges of a circular future. Later, in the 1990s
and early 2000s, Technocentric Circular Economy discourses of circularity 1.0 and 2.0 became
dominant and focused on sophisticated technical innovations instead of wholescale sociopolitical transformations. This is closely synchronous with the rise of neoliberalism and its
market-based approach to environmental issues. Since the 2008 economic crisis, Reformist
and Transformational Circular Society discourses have become more widespread, showing a
slowing faith in the market and a re-examination of the socio-political dimensions of circularity.

2.5

Discussion

This chapter’s approach involved first investigating the current limits of the discussion on
the CE (section 2.3.1), and then recognising that the term is actually much older and much
more diverse than what is usually conceived (section 2.3.2). Through this broader view
of circularity as an umbrella concept, the authors developed a new circularity discourse
typology, which attempts to unpack and navigate the full complexity of its ideas (section
2.4). This section reflects on the conceptual and methodological implications of this research.

2.5.1 Conceptual implications of each circularity discourse type
Each one of the above circularity discourse types has different conceptual strengths and
weaknesses, especially in relation to the 5 main challenges identified in section 2.3.1 (1.
growth, entropy and decoupling, 2. materials-energy-biodiversity nexus, 3. CE impactassessment and the rebound-effect, 4. socio-political implications of the CE, 5. alternative
visions of circularity) as well as the 5 levels of complexity presented in section 2.4.1 (please
see table 2.1).
Technocentric Circular Economy discourses focus on implementable technical innovations,
which can transform the industrial production system without having to change socialeconomic power relations. Technocentric Circular Economy visions are thus practical and

58

A Typology of Circular Economy Discourses

applicable, which makes them appealing to a broad range of actors seeking win-win
solutions to reconcile environmental and economic objectives. However, Technocentric
Circular Economy discourses fail to deal with all challenges identified in section 2.3, as they
do not address issues of entropy, planetary limits, rebound effects, and the social implications
of circularity, and only partly deal with challenge 2 on the resource nexus. They thus fall
within complexity levels 1 to 3 of Table 2.1, depending on their spatial and temporal scale
and their perspective on the resource nexus. Technocentric Circular Economy discourses
might hence be unappealing to social and environmental groups seeking a more holistic,
inclusive and systemic response to the socio-ecological challenges of the 21st century.
Reformist Circular Society discourses answer many of these concerns, particularly in terms
of social justice, participatory governance and the resource nexus (challenges 2 and 4) and
sometimes acknowledge the issues revolving around the rebound effect (challenge 3).
Reformist Circular Society discourses thus perhaps have the most largely appealing vision of
circularity, as they add a human dimension and seek to reconcile capitalism with a just and
sustainable future for all. However, these discourses fail to confront questions of entropy,
economic growth, decoupling and epistemological and ontological pluralism (challenges 1
and 5). Reformist Circular Society discourses are thus within complexity level 4 of Table 2.1
and might be unappealing to social movements with plural and ecocentric perspectives.
Transformational Circular Society discourses address all the 5 challenges identified
in section 2.3 by seeking a wholescale transformation of the entire socio-economic
system and not just its industrial model. They are thus in complexity level 5 of Table 2.1.
Transformational Circular Society discourses have a rational analysis of current planetary
limits and the structural contradictions of the capitalist system and propose a utopic vision
that is appealing to many social and environmental movements. However, they might be
disregarded by mainstream debates for being overly idealist regarding the likelihood of
fundamental socio-cultural change and the probability of a post-capitalist future.
In contrast to this, Fortress Circular Economy discourses are neither optimist about the
possibility of eco-economic decoupling nor about fundamental socio-cultural change. They
address some systemic challenges (1, 2 and 3), but instead of proposing socially desirable
solutions, they seek to manage and/or take advantage of the crisis in a top-down manner.
Fortress Circular Economy discourses are thus clearly not as universally desirable as they do
not address social, cultural and governance considerations (challenges 4 and 5). However,
they nonetheless play a key role in shaping circularity debates, especially in geostrategic
policy and business circles as they are the most realistic of all discourses due to their rational
and un-idealistic understanding of systemic conditions. As the socio-ecological crisis of the
Anthropocene worsens and climate change intensifies, Fortress Circular Economy positions
might become much more widely accepted, especially in a context where “it is easier to
imagine an end to the world than an end to capitalism”25 (Fisher, 2009). Yet, these discourses
25 Fisher attributes this quote to both Fredric Jameson and Slavoj Žižek (Fisher, 2009)

59

2

Chapter 2

can easily lead to a divided and unequal world of haves and have-nots; a type of eco-apartheid
(Malleson, 2016) (or fortress Europe/North America) where only a few nations can invest in
new circular solutions and gain access to the technologies and means to a materially affluent
life (Monsaingeon, 2017; Valenzuela and Böhm, 2017). In fact, in a 2019 report, Philip Alston,
the UN Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights, has already spoken of a
“climate apartheid scenario in which the wealthy pay to escape overheating, hunger, and
conflict, while the rest of the world is left to suffer” (Alston, 2019, p14).

2

Considering the strengths and weaknesses of each circularity discourse, there is great value
in opening up the debate on circularity to allow for a more complex discussion of the core
challenges of a circular future. Indeed, some discourses might lack realism, while others
might lack feasibility. A cross-pollination of ideas and perspectives is thus beneficial to
develop better policies, practices and research projects. Future transdisciplinary research
and participatory policymaking with deliberative mechanisms can help bring all discourses
to the table and establish more inclusive, legitimate, achievable and sustainable circular
futures. On the other hand, if a more plural debate on circularity is not held, there is a high
risk that a depoliticised discourse of circularity dilutes the complexity of the present socioecological crisis. This simple and uncontroversial discourse of circularity could create many
new business opportunities for some, by expanding capital accumulation into the realm
of waste materials and bio-resources. Yet, it will likely create a rebound effect and, thus,
do very little towards actually reducing humanity’s ecological footprint. Moreover, it can
lead to the enclosure, commodification, and marketization of nature and the commons,
which replicates global environmental injustices and ends up making circularity “a luxury”
(Schröder et al., 2019b, p13).

2.5.2 Methodological implications and challenges of building a discourse typology
There are inevitable simplifications involved in the development of a discourse typology.
Each concept within the typology is thus much more diverse than can be evidenced in this
research. For instance, there is a large diversity of visions of Degrowth (Kallis et al., 2018) and
the Bioeconomy (Hausknost et al., 2017). This discourse typology cannot distinguish all the
intricate sub-types within each discourse, rather it shows their commonalities and simplifies
their complexity so they can be understood in relation to other discourses. Further research
can build on this to analyse how different academic, public and private discourses fit within
this discourse typology. In addition to this, Table 2.1 can help distinguish the diversity of
Technocentric Circular Economy proposals, by classifying them in complexity levels 1 to 3.
Some discourses might not always be easily distinguishable black or white propositions and
could present multiple shades and nuances. Indeed, some discourses could be “hybrids”,
which include elements of a number of the 4 discourse types presented in this article.
Further case study research on specific circular sectors or stakeholders, using this typology
should acknowledge this complexity in their analysis of circular discourses, policies and

60

A Typology of Circular Economy Discourses

practices. A particular stakeholder might thus have a prominently Technocentric Circular
Economy discourse with moderate notes of Reformist Circular Economy. Moreover, some
actors might have discrepancies between their practices and their discourses, such as
having a Reformist Circular Society discourse and Fortress Circular Economy practices. Future
research can address these complexities by combining this typology with methodological
tools such as Q-methods and corpus-based discourse analysis.
While 26 of the 72 concepts in the timeline (36%) were from non-academic origins26, and
various circularity positions from the public and public sectors were reviewed (E.g., Ellen
MacArthur Foundation and McKinsey, 2015; European Commission, 2015; IRP, 2019; OECD,
2018; Schwartz and Randall, 2003; Verstraeten-Jochemsen et al., 2018; von Weizsäcker and
Wijkman, 2017; WEF et al., 2016), the majority of literature in this research originates from
academia. This represents another limitation of this chapter. Future research can use the
typology as a theoretical framework to analyse discourses from the public and private
sectors. This could help uncover different circularity discourses and better understand their
main strengths and weaknesses as well as test, improve and update the discourse typology
here proposed. Considering that the CE is still a contested concept with many public and
private actors competing to influence its meaning and interpretation, this is a particularly
important avenue for future research.
A final limitation of this research is that it is mostly based on desk research. Another method
to build a discourse typology could be through a set of workshops and focus group
discussions with various practitioners and academics. The limitations of a participatory
approach are the complexities in obtaining a diverse enough sample of stakeholders and
adequately covering discourses from many different countries and continents. They can
thus easily result in typologies that only apply to certain cultural or geographical contexts or
only represent a limited range of discourses. Nonetheless, for future research on the topic,
there is significant potential to hold participatory workshops where the discourse typology
here developed is used as the theoretical basis to analyse the discourse and practices
of specific CE sectors and actors. This would allow for innovative research that unpacks
different practitioner discourses of the CE and can help validate, adapt and improve the
discourse typology here developed.

26 Waste-Water Treatment, Solid Waste Management and Recycling, Bio-Digestion, Energy Recovery, Cyclic
Economy, Reverse Logistics, Biomimicry, Product Service System, Extended Producer Responsibility,
Bioeconomy, Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, Natural Capitalism, Sound Material-Cycle
Society, Cyclical Economy, The Biosphere Rules, Performance Economy, Blue economy, Buen vivir/Sumak
Kawsay, Regenerative capitalism, Social Circular Economy, Transition Movement, Laudato Si’, Economy for the
Common Good, Ubuntu, Ecological Civilization, Suma Qamaña/Vivir Bien

61

2

Chapter 2

2.6

Conclusions

As the CE concept is in a phase of “validity challenge”, it can still take many different
directions, which will determine whether it will collapse, cohere or persist as a contention
(Blomsma and Brennan, 2017). Considering how widely adopted the concept has become
within both academic and non-academic sectors, there is a unique opportunity to use it
as a tool for transformative change. Yet, if corporate and government actors continue to
use a CE framing that doesn’t consider systemic socio-ecological implications, the term
could easily become discredited as a refurbished form of greenwashing. This chapter brings
analytical tools to assess these discursive practices, untangle their meaning, and expand the
debate to a plurality of alternative circular futures.

2

Indeed, the circularity discourse typology can help both academics and practitioners better
analyse current policies and practices on circularity and sustainability transitions in general.
By fostering plurality and openness to other visions, the discourse typology can promote
more holistic and systemic thinking, which comprehensively includes different circular
futures. Moreover, it can contribute to the democratization of governance and policy
mechanisms by helping to situate and include less prominent voices and discourses and
to contrast current practices and proposed actions with a plurality of alternatives. The final
scope of this research is thus to open the imaginary towards a plural circular future in which
many sustainable futures can be hospitably embraced.
One core challenge and implication of these results is that evidencing discursive differences
could bring opposing discourses apart, rather than together. Research on deliberative
democracy and collaborative decision-making has shown that a better understanding
of conflicting ideas can actually promote respect, trust, innovation, and consensual
cooperation (Calisto Friant, 2019; Dryzek et al., 2019; Friend and Hickling, 2005; Schwarz and
Thompson, 1990). By unpacking and navigating different discourses of circularity, this article
thus hopes to promote greater inclusiveness, collaboration and pluralism in the debate and
implementation of this contested paradigm.
The authors encourage the use, adaptation and improvement of this discourse typology to
further build on this work, which can be seen as a continuous participatory thought process
with other scholars and practitioners. There is a particularly promising potential for innovative
future research, which builds on the discourse typology developed in this chapter from the
perspective of many inter and trans-disciplinary academic fields such as mission-oriented
innovation policy, political ecology, futures studies, science and technology studies, critical
systems thinking, and participatory action research. This can lead to the cross-pollination of
ideas and can help both academics and practitioners in their development of policies and
practices, which positively contribute to the complex socio-ecological challenges of the
21st century.

62

Chapter 3
How Circular Is Your Tyre: Experiences
With Extended Producer Responsibility
From a Circular Economy Perspective

This chapter is based on Campbell-Johnston, K., Calisto Friant, M., Thapa, K., Lakerveld, D., Vermeulen, W.J.V., (2020)
How circular is your tyre: Experiences with extended producer responsibility from a circular economy perspective.
Journal of Cleaner Production. 270, 122042. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.122042
An earlier version of this chapter was presented at the 2019 international Sustainable Development Research
Society Conference in Nanjing China on the 27th of June 2019.

Chapter 3

Abstract

3

The circular economy (CE) emphasises closing material loops to retain material value. The current
practice of tyre recycling in the Netherlands, through a system of extended producer responsibility
(EPR), appears an overwhelming success, with claims of 100% recovery. Yet, there is limited critical
understanding regarding the system’s circularity, considering alternative value retention options
and resource recovery outcomes. This study analyses this Dutch tyre EPR system and reflects on
how it can be improved from a systemic CE perspective. It uses a qualitative case study approach,
using interviews and a review of policy, legal and EPR reporting documents. This chapter assesses
the governance of this sector and reflects on the existing system, including its circularity and value
retention outcomes. Our analysis reveals seven central issues concerning how the EPR system
currently functions, resulting in limited circularity and sustainability outcomes, despite high
material recovery levels. To address these issues we recommend the continuous improvement
of recovery and sustainability targets beyond a single product life cycle, a more transparent
and inclusive governance system, as well as a greater focus on sufficiency strategies, e.g. design
for durability and a broader transformation of transport models. This chapter adds a practical
understanding of the capacity of EPR to contribute to CE.

64

How Circular Is Your Tyre?

3.1

Introduction

National, regional and local governments have recently begun to present the concept of
circular economy (CE) as a new pathway to sustainability and economic prosperity. The
championing of this inconsistent and contested concept (cf. Korhonen et al., 2018b) comes
amid increasing concerns over resource depletion, waste generation and the potential
overshoot of planetary boundaries induced by human activities on the biosphere (Henckens
et al., 2014; Rockström et al., 2009a). CE is broadly argued to meet these emerging challenges
through slowing, closing and narrowing resource loops, i.e. maximising the functional utility
of materials and energy (Geissdoerfer et al., 2017; Stahel, 2010). CE theoretically builds upon
and goes beyond earlier measures of waste valorisation and cleaner production initiatives to
an integrated systems perspective addressing both production and consumption practices
(Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2013; Vermeulen et al., 2018).
The European Commission (EC) frames CE in conjunction with economic opportunities
stating that “[CE] will boost the [European Union] EU’s competitiveness by protecting
businesses against scarcity of resources and volatile prices, helping to create new business
opportunities and innovative, more efficient ways of producing and consuming” (EC,
2013, p. 1). National governments have similarly outlined specific strategies, including
the Netherlands, France and Italy; with the Netherlands setting an initial target of 50%
less primary material use by 2030 (Ministry of Infrastructure and Environment and
Ministry of Economic Affairs, 2016b). Whilst the environmental and economic concerns
underpinning CE might be perceived as new, the means through which they are being
addressed are manifesting through more conventional or longer-standing organisational
practices, including increased recycling targets, waste legislation and extended producer
responsibility (EPR) commitments (Milios, 2018).
Scholars have devoted much time to analysing new business models and strategies related
to CE (cf. Bocken et al., 2016; Lüdeke-Freund et al., 2019). Yet, there is also a need to reflect
and examine these older CE initiatives and practices to understand their suitability and
capacity to facilitate and address the emerging societal concerns evidenced within the
existing CE debate.
One such system is EPR, which has been collectively and voluntarily adopted in many
EU member states for different products, including passenger car tyres (EC, 2014). EU
member states are free to choose how to organise the collections and treatment of tyres,
which are reported to the European Tyre and Rubber Manufacturers Association (ETRMA);
most member states have adopted EPR systems, which have successfully recovered high
quantities of used tyres (recovery rates for end-of-life (EOL) tyres in Europe are above 90%
since 2007) (ETRMA, 2017; ETRMA, 2018). However, despite such high levels of recovery,
there is little direct substitution (closed-loop), i.e. new tyres have a low content of recycled
rubber (EC, 2017). Indeed, up to 50% of collected tyres are burned – usually, for energy

65

3

Chapter 3

recovery (Scott, 2015) – a problem further compounded as natural rubber is a designated
critical raw material (EC, 2017). Whilst the technological feasibility of such direct material
substitution through devulcanization is being debated and explored (Myhre et al., 2012),
there is a broader question about the organisation and performance outcomes of EPR as an
older CE system to meet emerging societal challenges.

3

Previous research on EPR and tyre recycling in the EU has examined the various treatment
options (Torretta et al., 2015) and progress across member states, including the steady
departure from landfilling. Alternatively, Winternitz et al. (2019a) examined the EPR systems
of three European countries, reflecting on their varying policy approaches, successes and
potential limitations. Their findings demonstrated that an EPR system does not necessarily
guarantee that waste tyres are disposed of in the most environmentally beneficial manner.
Similarly, Lonca et al. (2018) examined the trade-offs of increased material circularity of tyres,
contracted against other sustainability indicators, e.g. human and ecosystem health. Their
research found that increased material circularity is beneficial from a resource perspective,
but not necessarily from other environmental perspectives (Lonca et al., 2018). Such research
adds to the complexity of organising disposal systems in a dynamic way that accounts for
potentially conflicting issues within EOL processes.
Building on these examples, this chapter aims to critically examine the organisation and
performance of an existing EPR system, to reflect on its strengths and suitability to deal
with the broader needs within the contemporary CE debate. Based on this, we examine
the question “how effectively do current ERP systems function from the current ambitions
of CE?” We use EPR for tyres in the Netherlands as a case study to explore this question. This
chapter, therefore, adds a practical understanding of the contribution of EPR to CE and
provides insights for new and existing EPRs globally.
This chapter is structured as follows. First, a literature review of CE, EPR and tyre treatment
practices is presented to further contextualize the analysis (Section 3.227). Next, the research
methods are presented (Section 3.3). This is followed by a description of the structure and
outcomes of the EPR system for tyres in the Netherlands (Section 3.4). Our analysis (Section
3.5) builds on these results, showing the limitations and challenges for EPR systems to lead
to a sustainable CE transition before concluding (Section 3.6).

3.2

Literature Review

3.2.1 Circular Economy: Origins, History and Implementation
While the CE concept itself dates back to 1990 (Pearce and Turner, 1990), the idea builds
on a long history of literature on resource limits and ecological transformations such as
27 Readers guide: to avoid repetition on what is CE and EPR readers are advised to skip section 3.2.1 and 3.2.2.

66

How Circular Is Your Tyre?

the “Limits to Growth” (D. H. Meadows et al., 1972), the “Tragedy of the Commons” (Hardin,
1968), the “Economics of the Coming Spaceship Earth” (Boulding, 1966), “Small is Beautiful”
(Schumacher, 1973) and “The Closing Circle” (Commoner, 1971).
More recently the CE has drawn its theoretical underpinnings from Industrial Ecology (IE)
(Aryes, 1989; Saavedra et al., 2018), cradle-to-cradle (McDonough and Braungart, 2002) and
performance economy (Stahel, 2010). The concept of CE is muddled and convoluted but
is broadly based on the premise of retaining the functional use of products and materials
within the economic sphere as long as possible. It is being advocated, in particular, by
private sector consultancies, e.g. the Ellen MacArthur Foundation (UK) and Circle Economy
(NL). Estimates suggest the cumulative outcome of earlier CE policies has resulted in the (re)
cycling of as little as 6% of global materials, and 12% within the EU27, leading to a greater
focus on increasing the value retention of material throughput (Haas et al., 2015).
The CE is also discussed as an evolutionary concept (cf. Blomsma and Brennan, 2017; Reike
et al., 2018). Of particular importance for our analysis are the three phases of the CE concept
proposed by Reike et al., (2018). First, CE 1.0 (1970 to 1990), is characterised by early waste
management practices focused on waste output as an environmental pollution problem to
be dealt with through EOL policies. This is when waste treatment and incineration plants
started to be developed and operated, especially in the Global North.
The second phase CE 2.0 (1990 to 2010), saw the development of many “win-win” strategies,
which make use of waste outputs as valuable resource inputs such as IE (Frosch and
Gallopoulos, 1989), Cleaner Production (Fresner, 1998), Industrial Symbiosis (Chertow, 2000),
Product-Service System (PSS) (Goedkoop et al., 1999), and EPR (Davis and Wilt, 1994). This is
when the concept of CE was first coined by Pearce and Turner (1990) and when associated
ideas appeared, such as “biomimicry” (Benyus, 1998), “cradle to cradle” (McDonough and
Braungart, 2002), and “performance economy” (Stahel, 2010). This period also saw the
widespread implementation of integrated waste management and recycling systems in
the Global North, including EPR systems, which mandated new responsibilities for private
sector actors (Reike et al., 2018b).
The third phase of CE 3.0 (from 2010), when discussions of the concept of CE became
more widespread and began to be framed against encroaching societal threats, including
planetary limits (Rockström et al., 2009), resource depletion, biodiversity loss, excessive
waste generation etc. (Reike et al., 2018b). This has led to a more integrated and holistic
understanding of material use, which aims to slow, reduce, narrow and close resource
cycles in a systemic manner through changes in consumption and production structures
and patterns (Reike et al., 2018b). However, this is also a period where varying visions of CE
are conceived, which are either transformative or reformist depending on their position
regarding the capacity for capitalism to overcome resource limits and decouple ecological
degradation from economic growth (see Reike et. al., 2018; Friant et. al., 2019).

67

3

Chapter 3

The implementation of CE-related activities and policies occurs in a variety of geographic
contexts and scales. CE practices thus range from national programmes, e.g. China’s 2009
CE ‘Promotion Law’ or international policies, e.g. the EU’s 2015 CE ‘Action Plan’ (Ghisellini et
al., 2016), to business models and individual company strategies (see Lüdeke-Freund et al.,
2019). Scholars have sought to define CE activities through the potential value retention
options that can be initiated throughout a product or material lifecycle, commonly described
as the R-hierarchy. These range from 3Rs (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) to iterations from four
to ten. A recent review of 69 such R-imperatives outlined a synthesis of 10 comprehensive
value retention options, which we adopt as our conceptual framing (Reike et al., 2018b)
(Table 1.1). Whilst the narrative and framing around CE articulates its “newness”, much of the
EU policy approach follows or seeks to build upon older CE practices (EC, 2013; cf. Gregson
et al., 2015; WFD 2018/851, 2018).

3.2.2 Extended Producer Responsibility

3

One such older CE practice is EPR, which is defined as “an environmental protection strategy
to reach an environmental objective of a decreased total environmental impact from a
product, by making the manufacturer of the product responsible for the entire life-cycle
of the product and especially for the take-back, recycling and final disposal of the product”
(Lindhqvist, 2000, p. 37). Crucially, the concept implies integrating responsibility in the
whole product life cycle, where the physical and monetary waste managerial responsibilities
(usually assigned to authorities and consumers) are transferred to the product producers.
EPR emerged in the 1990s, building on the experiences of waste managers, recyclers and
a policy approach concerned with promoting cleaner production initiatives (Lindhqvist,
2000). Such developments illustrated the more proactive role private sector actors played
in these earlier CE systems, giving them greater responsibility for the stewardship of their
products. Such ‘public-private’ configurations represented new steering programmes
practised by governments, as opposed to the conventional waste management policy of
earlier years (CE 1.0) (Reike et al., 2018b; Vermeulen and Weterings, 1997).
EPR builds on the “polluter pays principle”, incentivising producers to prevent waste
generation, whilst (supposedly) encouraging eco-design and supporting the appropriate
EoLprocesses, e.g. promoting recycling and reusing activities (Deutz, 2009; Ferrão et al.,
2008). However, previous studies show EPR activities are overtly focused on EoL activities,
negating an integrated lifecycle perspective that pursues continuous improvement and
higher environmental performances through, for example, material choices and design
for disassembly options (Vermeulen and Weterings, 1997). The EU has mandated the
responsibility of producers for the EoL disposal of vehicles, batteries and accumulators,
and waste electrical and electronic goods, whilst most member states have additionally
implemented a producer responsibility organisation to process used tyres (Deutz, 2009; EC,
2014; ETRMA, 2015). Member states must ensure their EPR schemes have an appropriate
collection and accessible schemes.
68

How Circular Is Your Tyre?

Alternatively, EPR has also been adopted in various countries in the Global South as a
product management tool for EoL tyres (Banguera et al., 2018; Zarei et al., 2018). However,
recent studies have illustrated the challenges of adopting EPR in these countries. Such
challenges include the limited knowledge of effective practices in Botswana (Mmereki et
al., 2019), incentivizing and integrating necessary actors in operations in Colombia (Park et
al., 2018), and directly transposing a European policy tool to Brazil (Milanez and Bührs, 2009).
Conversely, Cecchin et al.’s (2019) study in Ecuador highlighted the potential of integrating
social economy goals with conventional EoL practices associated with EPR.
EoL processing in EPR systems can be organised in various ways. Spicer and Johnson (2004a)
outline three approaches to implementation: (1)‘Original Equipment Manufacturer’takeback,
where the original producer takes direct responsibility for collecting and processing; (2)
‘Pooled Takeback’, where responsibly is shared between a consortium of producers, known
as the producer responsibly organisation (PRO), usually organised by a product category
code, e.g. tyres; and (3) ‘Product Responsibility Providers’ (PRP), where a private third-party
is contracted by the PRO and assumes EoL responsibly for the product on their behalf. This
(theoretically) results in dual benefits for manufacturers and the general public, including,
eliminating the financial risk associated with complex EoL processing activities (recycling,
incineration, disassembly, remanufacturing, refurbishing etc.). Governments are responsible
for rewarding and motivating good behaviour. Key regulatory aspects of an effective EPR
system include formulating long-term objectives, fostering continuous improvements and
updating targets, e.g. future scenarios, whilst encouraging frontrunners and compelling
laggards (Vermeulen and Weterings, 1997). Public benefits include distributed local
demanufacturing facilities and immediate economic feedback to product design, driving
improvements (Spicer and Johnson, 2004). Challenges for local demanufacturers include
knowledge of the original product blueprints, which producers can be unwilling to transfer,
and finding suitable markets for recyclable materials. Earlier studies argued that this
collective responsibility will weaken the eco-design drive of individual companies (Castell
et al., 2008). Next, we document the characteristics and treatment options for tyres.

3.2.3 Composition and Treatment Options for Tyres
Rubbers are thermosetting materials, which makes material recovery challenging because
of the vulcanization process during manufacturing (see Adhikari et al., 2000; Medina et al.,
2018). Pneumatic tyres are a combination of synthetic and natural rubber, carbon black,
elastomer compounds, steel chords, and textile fibres in addition to several other inorganic
and organic compounds (Torretta et al., 2015). Natural and synthetic compounds act as
sealants while fibre and steel chords give structure and carry tension (Feraldi et al., 2013).
There are several principal treatment practices for EoL tyres (see Table 3.1). First, product
reuse (R2), which involves the direct sale of a tyre whose tread is still deep enough for safe
use (the minimum tread depth is 1.6 mm in the EU). Second, retreading (R5), which involves

69

3

Chapter 3

3

replacing the outer tread of a tyre, when its general condition is insufficient. Repurposing
(R6) is the reuse of a tyre for alternative uses, for which it was not originally designed, such
as protection of racing tracks, materials for artwork, swings etc. Grinding (R7), involves the
crushing and granulation of tyres to extract rubber and other components, such as steel
and textile fibres (Aiello et al., 2009; Landi et al., 2018a, 2018b). Grinding produces rubber
that is of relatively low quality, meaning only a small percentage (1-5%) can be used in
new tyres. Devulcanization (R7) is a technological process where the rubber is chemically
recycled to obtain higher quality rubber that can be used in higher percentage in new tyres
(up to 30%) (Myhre et al., 2012). However, this technology is not yet commercially viable
and has not been deployed on a large scale (Saiwari et al., 2019). Pyrolysis (R8) uses high
temperatures (without oxygen) and chemical additives, for the recovery of energy, carbon
black, activated carbon, oil and steel from EoL tyres; if well managed the process can have
relatively low emissions (Myhre et al., 2012; Myhre and MacKillop, 2002; Sienkiewicz et al.,
2012). Finally, incineration (R8) involves the burning of tyres with oxygen for the recovery
of energy (often for cement kilns and other industrial furnaces); this process is less complex
than pyrolysis but creates a significant amount of greenhouse gases and other air pollutants
(Myhre and MacKillop, 2002).
TABLE 3.1 | R-hierarchy for tyre treatment.
R

Treatment Options

R0
R1
R2
R5
R6
R7
R8

Refuse via reducing vehicle ownership and using alternative modes of transport;
Reduce via life extension
Resell/Reuse discarded tyres which are safe and functional
Remanufacture by retreading functionally sound discarded tyres
Repurpose without or using less physical or chemical treatment
Recycling via processes including devulcanization and grinding.
Recovery of energy via pyrolysis or incineration

Whilst the notion of the ‘R-hierarchy’ might presuppose a prescriptive and preferable set
of recovery operations, these only relate to the product or material attributes and do not
account for contextual and broader systems factors, e.g. energy recovery; this might mean
a lower R-strategy, could be preferable under some contexts and conditions. Deciding
on the most effective treatment option can usually be ascertained through conducting a
life cycle assessment (LCA). Various studies have explored this exact question in different
national contexts (cf. Corti and Lombardi, 2004; Clauzade et al., 2010; Li et al., 2010; Fiksel
et al., 2011; Feraldi et al., 2013; Ortíz-Rodríguez et al., 2017). There is a broad consensus that
energy recovery as fuel can only capture up to 40% of the embedded energy within tyres
(Amari et al., 1999). However, these assessments differ in terms of geography and scope,
are non-standardised, hard to compare and, overall, they show conflicting and inconsistent
outcomes. This points to the need for more standardised impartial regional (Social)LCAs,
attributional and consequential, with local data, that can inform specific EPR systems as to
the most preferable recovery and treatment option.
70

How Circular Is Your Tyre?

New CE business models of the ‘performance economy’ such as Product-Service Systems
(PSS), that promote the leasing of products, services or performance instead of direct
consumer ownership could facilitate high-value retention options (Camilleri, 2018; Kjaer
et al., 2019; Stahel, 2010). Indeed, firms that maintain the ownership of their tyres are
incentivised to design long-lasting (R1), reusable (R2), recyclable (R7) and retreadable (R6)
tyres. However, this is not always the case, and strong regulation and careful management
of possible rebound effects are needed to ensure that PSS lead to positive environmental
outcomes (Demyttenaere et al., 2016; Hobson and Lynch, 2016; Junnila et al., 2018).

3.3

Materials and Methods

To evaluate the organisation and performance of an EPR scheme, this research adopted
a case study research design, following procedural insights as outlined by Yin (2003).
Case studies are defined as an in-depth description of a bounded system and are useful
to examine phenomena in their contextual settings; they are particularly adept to
understanding contemporary events (Yin, 2003, p. 5). Case studies are suited for qualitative
methods, including those used in the study: interviews, literature review, policy and
document analysis (Bryman, 2012).
This research uses the case study of EPR of tyres in the Netherlands, a system which has
been in operation (to some degree) since 1995. This case selection was justified through
two core reasons: (1) the Netherlands has, since 2005, had a high collection rate (≥ 100%)
(ETRMA, 2015); and (2) the Netherlands has a substantially higher level of material reuse
(e.g. direct reuse and recycling) than the European average, which is roughly 50% recycling
and 50% energy recovery (Scott, 2015). This second point corresponds to the intention of
moving up the waste hierarchy, the underlying principle for all EU recycling activity (EC,
2008). On this basis, the Netherlands represents a successful European EPR example and
therefore the case for this research (cf. EC, 2014).
A limitation of a case study approach of a single EPR system is that it cannot lead to
generalizable recommendations, even though the analysis provides useful practical
insights for other cases. Nonetheless, the analysis of a single case can be used to generate
preliminary observations and questions that can form the basis to evaluate future case
studies or comparative research. Indeed, considering the specific history, geopolitical
situation, socio-economic conditions and governance mechanisms in the Netherlands.
The main lessons from this research cannot be generalized to other contexts, especially in
the Global South, where conditions differ greatly. Moreover, all waste streams are unique
due to their complex composition, legalities, processing techniques, hazardous nature etc.
Therefore, the results and recommendations from this research are most relevant to our
specific case study. Nevertheless, some of the lessons might apply to other socio-economic
contexts and material streams, when supplemented by additional research on those other
sectors and conditions.
71

3

Chapter 3

Data collection was undertaken in two phases. First, we reviewed the available literature
on CE, EPR and tyres (Section 3.2). This set our theoretical framing and perspectives for
critically evaluating the EPR system (Section 3.4). The core data is comprised of policy
and legal documents on EPR in the Netherlands from its inception in 1995 to 2017. This
was supplemented with the EPR performance data, which (from 2005) has been reported
annually to the government. Fieldwork was conducted between January to May 2019
which included nine in-depth unstructured interviews, lasting between 30 and 90 minutes,
with government officials, industry and EPR representatives for tyres in the Netherlands.
Interviewees either worked for the PRO, were members (producers, importers, distributors
or EoL processors of tyres) or government officials involved in monitoring the performance
of the EPR system. Fieldwork also included two site visits to tyre manufacturing and recycling
facilities based in the Netherlands. Interviews were used to explain and elaborate on insights
gained from the literature and document analysis. A complete list of the interviewees, data
and their sources are in the supplementary materials of Campbell-Johnston et al. (2020a).

3

Next, we analysed the data. First, we reviewed the policy documents and performance
data and, in conjunction with interviews, constructed an overview of the EPR system in
the Netherlands (Section 3.4); this included history, an overview of the policy structure,
actors, targets and key roles. Furthermore, we coded the performance of the EPR data using
the 10R framework of Reike et al. (2018) to categorise the treatment outcomes. Second,
we undertook a critical evaluation and reflection, using insights from the interviews and
the literature to reflect on the strengths, weaknesses and issues about organisation and
performance; including aspects of continuous improvement, policy scope and value
retention outcomes (see Section 3.5).

3.4

Case Study Description

3.4.1 Regulatory and Legal Overview
The introduction of EPR in the Netherlands originates in the 1988 ‘Note on Prevention and
Recycling of Waste’, in which context the government introduced the concept of EPR in
1990 to enable a series of participatory policy projects designing the recycling strategies for
29 waste streams (Vermeulen et al., 1997; Vermeulen and Weterings, 1997).
Consequently, for the tyres waste stream the Dutch government introduced the Besluit
Beheer Personenwagenbanden (Management of Passenger Car Tyre Decree) in 1995. Broad
responsibilities were attributed to producers and importers to organise the collection and
treatment of EoL tyres. In this EPR system, garages and tyre service companies collected old
car tyres (mostly after replacing them with new ones) and charged the customer a fee for
this collection and purchase of new ones. Garages and tyre service companies then passed
the used car tyres to collection and processing companies along with the collection fee, to

72

How Circular Is Your Tyre?

sort and adequately process used car tyres. A provisional collection target in the Decree was
set at 60% product reuse (direct reuse is defined here as any recovery activity from R2 to R8,
see Table 4.1), which included a minimum of 20% material reuse (R2 to R7) and maximum
of 20% energy recovery (R8).
However, this system was open to exploitation, primarily through collectors taking the
consumer fee and not passing the tyres onto processors. The consequential stockpiling
resulted in municipalities and provinces financing the collection and treatment of illegally
dumped EoL tyres (RecyBEM B.V., 2017, see supplementary material of Campbell-Johnston
et al., (2020a)).
After many discussions between sectoral representatives and the Ministry of Housing,
Spatial Planning and the Environment in 2000, the 2003 Besluit Beheer Autobanden (Car
Tyre Management Decree) was developed. Producers were responsible for organising
EoL collection and treatment, either individually or collectively. Key provisions of this act
included (i) a focus on car tyres, caravans and trailers; (ii) a broad definition of ‘producer’, to
include all producers, distributors and importers, who are responsible for organising the
collection and treatment; and (iii) an old-for-new or 1-for-1 regulation, where the final user
of the tyre, must be allowed to return the old tyres at no cost when purchasing a new one.
All producers are required to pay a disposal fee, for every product brought onto the Dutch
market. The treatment targets were not adjusted from the 1995 Decree, setting material
reuse (R2 to R8) at 20% of the total weight of collected materials28. Moreover, producers
and importers were required to report their performance to the government each year. This
report must include (a) the number of car tyres that were made available to a party for the
first time in that calendar year; (b) the number of used tyres collected in that calendar year;
and (c) the percentage of used tyres processed.
Besides the 2003 Decree, the treatment for tyres has been regulated by EC Directive
1999/31/EC, which prohibits rubber tyres from going to landfill, and the Dutch Landelijk
Afvalbeheerplans (LAPs) (National Waste Management plans) of 2003 (LAP 1), 2009 (LAP 2)
and 2017 (LAP 3).
The first National Waste Plan of 2003 establishes the goal for 50% of the total weight of
used rubber tyres to be reused as material (R2 to R8). However, the 20% goal of the Car
Tyre Management Decree of 2003, has precedence over any objective of the LAPs. LAP 2
continued with the same objectives as the previous one but in its 2014 modification, it adds
a “minimum standard” of at least “material recycling” (R7) for all tyres that can be recycled
for less than €175 per tonne. For tyres that are not suitable for recycling or that cannot
be recycled for less than €175 per tonne, energy recovery is considered the “minimum
standard”, and is thus allowed. In 2017, LAP 3 further increases the “minimum standard” for
energy recovery to tyres that cannot be recycled for less than €205 per tonne.
28 Material reuse in the Decree is defined as: reuse of materials for the same purpose for which they were designed
or for other purposes (R2, R5, R6, and R7), including energy recovery (R8).

73

3

Chapter 3

The “minimum standard” is based on the ‘Ladder van Lansink’ (a motion accepted in the
Dutch Parliament in the 1980s), which recommends reuse, recycling, energy recovery and
landfilling as the appropriate sequence of treatment options (Lansink and Veld, 2010). A
2014 modification to LAP2 further expanded the collection responsibilities from passenger
cars and light commercial vehicles to also include motor tyres, trucks, buses, agricultural
vehicle tyres etc. Tyres from bicycles and scooters are excluded.

3

In 2018, the EU outlined a CE package, which amended the framework directive on
waste (Directive (EU) 2018/851 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May
2018 amending Directive 2008/98/EC on waste). The renewed waste directive creates
new requirements for EPR systems, including having effective data collection processes,
transparent operations (including the selection procedure for waste management
operators), and dialogue and collaboration with civil society organisations including social
economy actors. The Directive also encourages (meaning it is not mandatory) member
states to establish eco-design requirements that ensure products are easily recyclable,
reusable, repairable and technically durable, contain recycled materials, and have reduced
environmental impacts throughout their entire lifecycle.
These requirements were set to ensure that EPR contributes to a CE transition and operates
according to the EU waste hierarchy, as established in article 4 of Directive 2008/98/EC.
However, these new requirements have not been transposed into Dutch law yet as the
Member States have until the 5th of July 2020 to do so, whilst EPR systems have until the 5th
of January 2023 to update their structure and operations. Whether this results in substantial
changes in the Dutch EPR scheme remains to be seen. However, it provides an opportunity
to revisit the governance and circularity of the EPR system for tyres.

3.4.2 Extender Producer Responsibility: Structure and Implementation
In response to the 1995 Decree tyre importers, distributors and producers founded the
‘Vereniging Band en Milieu’ (Association BEM), to implement their obligation under this
Decree. This body is formerly responsible for communications with the government. To
manage the updated system established by the Car Tyre Management Decree of 2003,
the tyre producers and importers founded two other organizations. First, the Stichting
Fonds Band en Milieu (Foundation Funds for Tyre and Environment, hereafter known as
the Foundation) is responsible for the financial management of the waste management
system, and the collection and management of recycling fees. The Foundation functions to
keep individual members’ financial contributions and market share confidential (Winternitz
et al., 2019). The Foundation then established RecyBEM B.V., a private company, which is
the collective implementation organization of the Association BEM. RecyBEM B.V. is thus
contracted by the Foundation to manage the collection, processing and reporting of the
EPR system (see Figure 3.1). In 2013, RecyBEM B.V. began setting voluntary processing
targets, starting with 70% material and product reuse (R2, R5, R6 and R7) in 2013 to 90% in

74

How Circular Is Your Tyre?

2015. The system is thus structured as a third-party takeback where RecyBEM B.V. is the PRP
(see Section 3.2.2).

Producers and
Importers

Manages

Association BEM
(1994)

Membership

Foundation
Funds Tyre &
Environment
(2004)

Founded

Founded

RecyBEM B.V.
(2004)

Collecting and processing
system

Contracts

3

Certified
Collectors

Recyclers

Disposers
Quality and control

FIGURE 3.1 | Organization of the Dutch EPR (Source: RecyBEM B.V., 2019, edited).

To finance the system, all producers and importers of car tyres, caravans and trailers, must
pay a waste management contribution fee to the Foundation for every tyre they put on
the Dutch market. Between 2004 and 2015 only producers that were members of the
Association contributed to the waste management fee. In response to protests from the
Foundation over free riders not contributing fees, a 2015 government “general binding
statement” (see supplementary material of Campbell-Johnston et al., (2020a)) allowed the
PRP to oblige all producers, distributors and importers (both from retail and internet sales)
to pay the waste management contribution fee to the Foundation or to establish another
EPR system. Non-members can face legal action from the PRP for not contributing.
RecyBEM B.V. is the main operator of the waste management activities, the costs of
which are covered by a contribution fee paid to it by the Foundation (see Figure 3.2). It
uses the fee to contract and pay third-party collectors, which are in charge of bringing
the tyres to processors, who recover the value from tyres based on the market conditions,
RecyBEM B.V. criteria and state targets and regulations. To ensure the quality of the recycling
operations, collectors can only operate with recyclers, disposers and processors that have
been certificated by RecyBEM B.V., which includes a quality management system, as of
75

Chapter 3

2018 following ISO 9001: 2015 standard (RecyBEM B.V., 2019, see supplementary material of
Campbell-Johnston et al., (2020a)).
Waste Management
Contribution fee

Foundation
Tyre &
Environment

RecyBEM
B.V.

Sales of new tyres
Producer /
importer

Valued tyres
Wholesale

Retailer
Customer

Collector

Scrap tyres

Collecting of used tyres

Occasion
tyres
Material
Recylcing
(R7)

Sorting of used tyres
Municipality

3

Remanufacture
(R5), e.g.
retreading

Collecting fee

Energy
recovery (R8)
Alternative
reuse

FIGURE 3.2 | Financial mechanism of the Car Tyre Management Decree, source: RecyBEM B.V., 2019,
(edited).

In 2004, the waste management contribution fee, paid by importers and producers per tyre
sold, was set at € 2,00 and by 2017 this had been reduced to € 1,30. This fee is internalised
in the consumer price of a new tyre. Collectors (garages) are paid a part of this fee, which
in 2004 was € 1,25 per collected tyre and in 2017 had been reduced to € 1,05 (see Figure
3.3). The difference between the collecting and the recovery fee is used by the PRP to
cover administrative costs and unexpected expenses. Every year, the waste management
contribution fee and the collecting fee are revised and updated based on a market study
conducted by an independent third-party consultancy: Fact Management Consultants.
The system operates with a pay-as-you-go structure where each year, a maximum waste
management contribution fee is charged and, at the end of the year, a definitive waste
management contribution fee is calculated based on the actual sale and recovery outcomes
of the year and any surpluses and/or shortfalls are thus settled.

76

How Circular Is Your Tyre?

FIGURE 3.3 |Collecting and waste management contribution fee 2014-2017 (own work, source: annual
reports see supplementary material of Campbell-Johnston et al., (2020a)).

3

3.4.3 Performance
The membership of the Association BEM has been rising continuously (Figure 3.4),
representing over 90% of producers by 2015. The notable rise from 2015 is a consequence
of the “general binding statement” of 2015, giving the PRO the power to compel noncompliant actors to pay into their system.

FIGURE 3.4 | Association BEM Members between 2004 and 2017 (own work, source: annual reports see
supplementary material of Campbell-Johnston et al., (2020a)).

Figure 3.5 shows the high collection rates of the Dutch EPR system. The higher volume of
sold tyres in 2010 and 2011 can be explained by the particularly cold winters of those years,
and correspondingly higher sales of winter tyres. The higher collection rates of 2016 and
2017 can be explained by the implementation of the “general binding statement” of 2015,
which led to new members joining the scheme.

77

Chapter 3

3

FIGURE 3.5 | Sold tyres vs. collected tyres between 2004 and 2017 2017 (own work, source: annual reports
see supplementary material of Campbell-Johnston et al., (2020a)).

Figure 3.6 presents the destination of used rubber tyres managed by the PRP between 2005
and 2017. The red dotted line represents the 50% material and product reuse (i.e. R2, R5, R6
and R7) target established by the first National Waste Plan (2003). The red line indicates the
20% reuse as materials (i.e. R2, R5, R6, R7 and R8) target of the Car Tyre Management Decree
of 2003. The dotted black line represents RecyBEM B.V.’s voluntary material and product
reuse targets (i.e. R2, R5, R6 and R7): 70% by 2013, 80% by 2014 and 90% by 2015. The solid
black line represents RecyBEM B.V.’s voluntary material reuse target (R7): 25% by 2013, 35%
by 2014 and 50% by 2015.
Figure 3.6 and Table 3.2 show that the Dutch PRO has continuously met the targets in the
National Waste Plan and the Car Tyre Management Decrees, as well as voluntary targets
(see supplementary material of Campbell-Johnston et al., (2020a)). Moreover, the interviews
from the public and private sectors confirmed that the minimum standard for incineration
was also met, meaning no tyres that can be recycled for less than € 175 (2014-2016) or € 205
(2017 onwards) were sent for energy recovery. Therefore, no fines have been given to the
organization for violating the rules.
The explicit nature of the recovery outcomes was further investigated and clarified during
the interviews (see supplementary material interviewees of Campbell-Johnston et al.,
(2020a)). This allowed a better understanding of the implications and complexities of each
recovery option. In the case of “product reuse” (R2), representing over 30% of EoL tyres in
2017, interviewees commented that many tyres are sold to countries in Eastern Europe,

78

How Circular Is Your Tyre?

although the actual destinations are known only to the PRO29. Dutch consumers tend to
change their tyres before the minimum recommended tread depth in the EU of 1.6 mm, due
to the obliged annual car inspection (EC, 2019), so many discarded tyres still have a high use
value. However, the future EoL and safe recovery of those tyres are no longer guaranteed
once they are exported,
if they goettoal. destinations
the
capacity
K. Campbell-Johnston
/ Journal of Cleaner without
Production 270
(2020)
122042 to process them.

9

3

FIGURE 3.6 | Destination of collected used rubber tyres by RecyBEM B.V. between 2005 and 2017 (own
work, source: annual reports see supplementary material of Campbell-Johnston et al., (2020a)).

Fig. 6. Destination of collected used rubber tyres by RecyBEM B.V. between 2005 and 2017 (own work, source: annual reports Supplementary material).

Table 2
Recycling Targets and results.

TABLE
3.2
| Recycling
targets
results
for Dutch tyre recycling 2005 – 2017.
RecyBEM B.V.
target:
Minimum
RecyBEM
target:and
Minimum
product
material re-use of total collected and material re-use of total collected
Car Tyre Management Decree: Minimum
tyres (R7)
tyres (R2-R7)
Car Tyre Management
material re-use of the total weight of total
target:
RecyBEM target:
Target 20% (2005-2012) RecyBEM B.V.
50% (2005-2012)
collected tyresDecree:
(R2-R8), Minimum
25% (2013)
70% (2013)
Minimum material
Minimum product
and
20% (2005-2017)
material re-use of the
35% (2014)
80% (2014)
collected material re-use of total
50% (2015-2017) re-use of total
90% (2015-2017)
total weight of total
tyres (R7)

collected tyres2005-2017:
(R2-R7) 100% average
collected tyres (R2-R8)

Result 2005-2012: 54% average
2005-2012: 82% average
2013: 56%
2013: 91%
2014: 66%
2014: 96%
20% (2005-2012)
50%
2015-2017: 64,8% average
2015-2017: 96% average

Target

(2005-2012)
25% (2013)
70% (2013)
35% (2014)
80% (2014)
50% poses
(2015-2017)
90%
chemicals. This complexity
the main obstacle
to(2015-2017)
tyre man-

20% (2005-2017)

National
Waste
National Waste
Policy: Minimum
material re-use
of the total weight of
Policy:
Minimum
collected tyres (R2-R8)
material
re-use of
50% (2005-2017)
the total weight
of
collected tyres
2005-2017: 100% average
(R2-R8)
50% (2005-2017)

form of downcycling, which does not allow for the closing of
resource loops. Instead, greater priority should be given to other
2005-2012: 54% average
2005-2012: 82% average recovery
2005-2017:
100%such
average
2005-2017:reuse
100% and repurposing.
options
as retreading,
56%
2013: 91%
average
Moreover, eco-design must be
encouraged so that EOL tyres are
5. Analysis and future2013:
implications
2014: 66%
2014: 96%
easier to remanufacture and recycle and so that new tyres can
Since the initial experiments
in 64,8%
1995, average
the Dutch2015-2017:
EPR system
foraverage contain higher quantities of granulated rubber without
2015-2017:
96%
compromising on their quality. In this regard, further investpassenger car tyres has reached 100% collection rate, with low
ment in R&D would be necessary and could be implemented by
energy recovery levels (5% in 2017) and zero landﬁlling. Inan obligation to use a percentage of the waste management
terviewees viewed the system as stakeholder friendly, ﬁnancially
contribution fee to ﬁnance it. An autonomous or government
efﬁcient, and effective at preventing the widespread illegal
can
be established
manage
dumping of tyres,
which
occurred
Decree.
The
29 We
contacted
the before
PRO forthe
the 2003
data on
the final
destinationestablished
of tyres on fund
various
occasions,
but weto
were
unablethis part of the
fee to ﬁnance transformative and disruptive innovations, which
system meets the minimum
standards
and targets set in the 2003
to obtain this
information.
can challenge incumbents. Another option is to establish a
LAPs and the PROs voluntary targets. However, it also has many key
differentiated fee based on the sustainability of tyres (durability,
obstacles, weaknesses and limitations both from the perspective of
recyclability, percentage of recycled content etc.) to incentivize
CE 2.0 and of CE 3.0. This section outlines these challenges, and
proposes recommendations, which, after careful adaptation, could 79 eco-design and innovation in the marketplace.
2. Managing exports and leakages: A large percentage of EOL tyres
also provide useful insights for new and existing EPRs in the global
are exported for reuse and retreading (about 33% in 2017). While
North and South alike:

Result

agement in the Netherlands.

Chapter 3

Regarding retreading operations (R5), very few tyres are suitable for retreading due to
quality imperatives, hence very few EoL tyres can take this recovery route. Moreover, the
Netherlands does not have any retreading plant, so tyres must be exported for this purpose
and, once again, their EoL and safe recovery are not guaranteed in the importing country.
Repurposing (R6) represents a very small fraction of EoL tyres and concerns punctual and
limited uses such as cart-track protections, and bumpers on quays and waterways.
Finally, recycling (R7), the most common recovery operation for EoL tyres, is carried out
through granulation, which is used in a multiplicity of lower value outcomes, such as
insulation materials, and engineering applications (mainly for road construction), filling for
artificial sports fields etc. Due to energy efficiency, safety and quality imperatives, new tyres
currently contain about one to five per cent of granulated rubber from EoL tyres.

3

Most interviewees reported a high level of satisfaction with the EPR system in the
Netherlands. Tyre producers and distributors value the low cost of tyre recovery operations
and the “hands-off” approach that this third-party take-back structure gives them. The PRO
enjoys a great level of legitimacy due to its track record of compliance with government
targets and low recovery costs. Producers and importers thus give a significant amount
of autonomy to the organization (and PRP) and let it manage collection and recovery
operations. Producers, importers, collectors and processors are not directly connected and
don’t collaborate, nor share information to improve tyre recycling outcomes or increase
the uptake of recycled rubber in new tyres. There is little evidence that the Dutch EPR
system provides an incentive for eco-design, rather it incentivizes producers and importers
to outsource recovery operations at the lowest possible cost. While the PRO has financed
several research and development projects on devulcanization, this is not enough to foster
lifecycle thinking and a full closure of resource loops.
Despite this apparent success, there has been a recent backlash against recycled rubber and
the EPR system in response to public concerns over the human and environmental health
impacts of artificial sports fields made with recycled rubber granulate (Zembla, 2016). This
led to a government inquiry on the topic and a series of reports were commissioned. In
line with recent academic research (Bleyer and Keegan, 2018; Peterson et al., 2018), and
evaluations of the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA, 2017), the Dutch government report
on human health has found no evidence of cancer risks related to artificial turf fields made
with recycled rubber (RIVM, 2017). However, other government reports evidenced important
environmental impacts, especially for aquatic life (STOWA, 2018; Verschoor et al., 2018). This
demonstrates the complexities of a circular system, which aims to narrow, slow, shrink, and
close material cycles, and does so in ways that do not affect human and environmental
health. This is often complicated, especially when dealing with complex recycling processes
and materials containing a mixture of often unknown or toxic chemicals. This complexity
poses the main obstacle to tyre management in the Netherlands.

80

How Circular Is Your Tyre?

3.5

Analysis and Future Implications

Since the initial experiments in 1995, the Dutch EPR system for passenger car tyres has
reached a 100% collection rate, with low energy recovery levels (5% in 2017) and zero
landfill. Interviewees viewed the system as stakeholder friendly, financially efficient, and
effective at preventing the widespread illegal dumping of tyres, which occurred before
the 2003 Decree. The system meets the minimum standards and targets set in the 2003
LAPs and the PROs voluntary targets. However, it also has many key obstacles, weaknesses
and limitations both from the perspective of CE 2.0 and CE 3.0. This section outlines these
challenges, and proposes recommendations, which, after careful adaptation, could also
provide useful insights for new and existing EPRs in the global North and South alike:
Recommendations from a CE 2.0 perspective
Promoting higher-value recovery: Figure 4.6 and Table 3.2 demonstrate a high focus on
recycling, yet the recycling of tyres currently produces low-quality granulate that cannot
be used in large quantities in new tyres. This focus on material recovery is thus a form of
downcycling, which does not allow for the closing of resource loops. Instead, greater priority
should be given to other recovery options such as retreading, reuse and repurposing.
Moreover, eco-design must be encouraged so that EoL tyres are easier to remanufacture
and recycle and so that new tyres can contain higher quantities of granulated rubber
without compromising on their quality. In this regard, further investment in R&D would be
necessary and could be implemented by an obligation to use a percentage of the waste
management contribution fee to finance it. An autonomous or government-established
fund can be established to manage this part of the fee to finance transformative and
disruptive innovations, which can challenge incumbents. Another option is to establish a
differentiated fee based on the sustainability of tyres (durability, recyclability, percentage of
recycled content etc.) to incentivise eco-design and innovation in the marketplace.
Managing exports and leakages: A large percentage of EoL tyres are exported for reuse and
retreading (about 33% in 2017). While these are high-value recovery options, in theory, the
lack of monitoring of the destination of these tyres does not guarantee an environmentally
safe recovery. It is thus key to set up mechanisms to prevent exports from happening and
to have greater oversight over the export destination and final disposal of tyres. This is a
critical concern since tyres can have significant adverse human and environmental health
impacts if they are not properly recycled (Li et al., 2010; Verschoor et al., 2018). However,
controlling exports and following tyres through their multiple uses and owners is a complex
process. A possible solution to this problem would be to raise consumer awareness and
improve the annual car inspection process so tyres are not discarded before they reach
the minimum tread depth. This would keep tyres in use for longer, improve their value for
customers, and prevent them from being exported, thus reducing transport emissions and
impacts overseas. The above measure would have to be combined with strong controls

81

3

Chapter 3

on the export of second-hand tyres so that tyres with a tread depth under the minimum
standard are not exported for direct re-use. Moreover, enforcement of EoL tyre export
controls should be reinforced so they are not exported to countries that do not meet Dutch
social and environmental standards.

3

Recommendations from a CE 3.0 perspective
Aiming for sufficiency to reach the highest value retention options (R0, R1): Having longerlasting tyres is perhaps one of the most important strategies, which can lead to significant
sustainability improvements, as it directly reduces overall tyre consumption (R1 - reduce).
The current EPR system has so far done nothing in this regard, and tyre consumption has
increased between 2004 and 2017 (see Figure 3.5). The PRO could directly work with rubber
tyre manufacturers and importers to design tyre in a way that guarantees their durability.
This has the added benefit of reducing the number of resources spent dealing with EoL tyre
management further down the product lifecycle. Awareness campaigns among consumers
can also increase the lifespan of tyres and be done through a combination of product labels
and media campaigns. This R1 strategy is second in the value retention hierarchy, leading to
considerable environmental benefits, thanks to the reduced pressure on natural resources
(rubber, iron, fibres etc.) and the avoided impacts from production, use and disposal of tyres.
An even more effective strategy would be to reduce tyre consumption by reducing the
need for tyres in the first place (R0 – refuse). This could be achieved through effective urban
and regional planning, as well as transport policies that encourage public transportation,
rail, cycling and walking. However, these policies are beyond the concern of a PRO and can
thus only be established by national, provincial and municipal governments. This shows the
limitations of EPR systems in general, especially with the highest value retention options: R0
and R1. To implement these measures, a percentage of the waste management contribution
fee can be given to a government agency or an autonomous institution responsible for
reducing the overall domestic material consumption and ecological footprint through
sufficiency strategies. This agency could thus develop innovative transportation solutions
which work towards reducing the need for rubber tyres such as improved national rail
networks, and sustainable urban planning solutions.
Collaboration and multi-stakeholder governance: The existing EPR system lacks effective
connection and collaboration between tyre producers and recyclers. This inhibits product
innovation concerning the application of reclaimed rubber. The EPR system for tyres in
the Netherlands could hence be improved by further integrating recyclers, disposers and
processors members with the BEM Association. This would reinforce collaboration across
the whole value chain and ensure that the EPR system does not just incentivize low-cost
recovery options.
Socially inclusive governance considerations have been disregarded by the Dutch EPR
system. Various scholars have pointed out the importance of these aspects to construct

82

How Circular Is Your Tyre?

a fair and fully sustainable CE (Hobson and Lynch, 2016; Kirchherr et al., 2017; Merli et al.,
2018; Millar et al., 2019; Moreau et al., 2017), which tackles questions of intellectual property,
technology transfer, ownership, production methods, benefit sharing and participation
in decision-making processes. While the Dutch EPR does have a successful governance
structure that includes all the relevant producers and importers (see Section 3.4.2), it is
not particularly inclusive beyond direct industry members. This reduces the capacity for
democratic oversight, transparency and accountability, leading to suboptimal outcomes
in terms of recovery options and human and environmental health (see Section 3.4.3). To
improve this, it is key to foster greater participation of civil society and public authorities
in the governance, oversight and management of the EPR system. This can be achieved
by forcing the BEM Association to include a certain percentage of civil society members,
which represent the interests of citizens and the natural environment. This would force the
EPR system to consider wider social and environmental concerns and improve the overall
transparency and accountability of the system.
Effective monitoring and continuous improvement of the EPR system: Considering that
collection targets have not been adjusted since 2003, and remain vaguely defined, it is key
to update targets and explore the future direction of the sector. In fact, not only are the
established recovery targets not ambitious enough but they were already met in the year
they were set (see Section 3.4.3).
Setting renewed goals is particularly important as the current system promotes a standard
and generally low waste management contribution fee, which has incentivised low-cost
and low-quality recovery options over higher-value-retention ones. Moreover, the existing
monitoring system reports only collected volumes and treatment processes. This leaves
data gaps regarding how recovered materials are used and what is the final fate of exported
EoL tyres, all of which can hide unsustainable practices.
The careful regulation and monitoring of the EPR system through effective government
policy, civil society oversight, and continuously improving targets and incentives for highervalue retention options (especially R0-R6) is thus key. Moreover, it is necessary to overhaul the
ways by which the best processing options are chosen (including the selection procedure
for waste management operators) and the ways by which investments are carried out to
achieve continuous improvements in new recovery options (e.g. R&D in devulcanization or
pyrolysis). Better monitoring, transparency, oversight and civil society participation in these
processes is key to ensure the continuous improvement of the EPR system and to promote
socially and environmentally sustainable design and recovery practices.
mproving overall social and environmental outcomes beyond EoL tyres: The consequences of
potentially socially and/or environmentally harmful uses of granulated rubber show the
weakness of focusing on recovery alone rather than actual sustainability outcomes. It also
raises the question regarding extended value chain governance, and whether producers
should have continued responsibility beyond the first EoL processing of the product. Such

83

3

Chapter 3

expansions of capacities must be done only after impartial, non-conflicting, regional LCAs
aimed at maximizing circularity, social fairness and sustainability. In fact, in such complex
situations, having clear research and data at hand is vital to plan the best possible recovery
options with human and ecological health in mind. Furthermore, a plan to improve
the sustainability outcomes of the entire tyre supply chain should be established and
implemented in coordination with a more democratic and inclusive EPR structure. This
can ensure that the EPR system doesn’t just recycle EoL tyres but also leads to tangible
improvements in terms of socio-ecological outcomes, and raw material demand. The overall
aim of a CE is not just to close resource loops, but to reduce the pressure of human activities
on the planet to ensure the well-being of current and future generations (Kirchherr et al.,
2017; Korhonen et al., 2018a). An EPR system should thus be understood as a component
of a broader policy objective, which aims to sustainably and equitably reduce a country’s
overall environmental footprint.

3

Circular business models: Circular service or leasing business models based on the
performance of tyres, rather than selling large quantities of tyres could be encouraged to
incentivize higher-value maintenance for producers and consumers (Stahel, 2010). Indeed,
under the right conditions, PSS can lead to a sustainable CE, since industries which keep
ownership of their tyres have a direct incentive to develop long-lasting and easily recyclable
products (Camilleri, 2018; Kjaer et al., 2019). It could thus improve reduce, reuse, retreading
and quality recycling within the Netherlands, henceforth reducing the overall consumption
and export of tires whose fate remains unknown once exported. However, this necessitates
careful government oversight and regulation to prevent rebound effects and ensure that
PSS lead to reduced overall resource use and create positive social and environmental
sustainability outcomes (Hobson and Lynch, 2016).
The identified gaps and these proposed solutions provide an opportunity for the EPR
organization to transform from being an EoL tyre management entity to a true driver of
circularity, playing a transformative role in addressing prominent contemporary social and
environmental challenges. In this transition, the system must be more inclusive, democratic
and adaptive to continuous improvements. The existing fragmented systems of isolated EoL
tyre management must be integrated into a value chain governance approach and highvalue maintaining targets must be envisioned together and collectively worked towards
with greater transparency.
The abovementioned recommendations are in line with those of the updated EU waste
directive, which calls for EPR systems to include eco-design requirements to reduce
environmental impacts as well as to improve transparency, reporting, monitoring and
collaboration with civil society. There is thus now a unique opportunity to overhaul the
Dutch EPR system through holistic CE 3.0 strategies, leading to both improved human wellbeing and ecosystem functioning.

84

How Circular Is Your Tyre?

However, a possible limitation of the above recommendations is the small size of the
Netherlands in the global market for tyres. Indeed, the country imports most of its tyres
and can hardly force large tyre producers overseas to significantly change their design and
production processes. EU-wide directives with ambitious targets are necessary, especially
on for tyre recycling, retreading, repurposing, and the percentage of recycled content in
new tyres. Indeed, while the EU has established a new CE action plan with various new
policies, it has not taken further action on tyres or rubber recycling. Further action from a
holistic CE 3.0 perspective is hence needed both nationally and internationally. Another
key limitation of the above recommendations is that they are directed towards the unique
social, historical, political, economic and technical circumstances of the Dutch EPR system
for EoL tyres. Therefore, further research is needed to validate and apply our insights and
commendations to other case studies and waste streams.

3.6

Conclusion

This chapter examined and evaluated the structure, organisation, performance and
potential limitations of the Dutch EPR system as a case study to explore how these older CE
2.0 systems can be adapted to fulfil the broader societal concerns embedded in the current
CE 3.0 debates (i.e. concerns over resource supply, planetary limits, waste generation). It
adds a practical understanding of the relationship between EPR and CE, and the former’s
capacity to contribute to the latter.
Despite this representing a successful example of CE 2.0 initiatives and fulfilling the
obligations of the national legislation, our analysis outlined seven limitations and issues,
which, we argue, can be the basis for modifying and creating an EPR that meets the needs
of the existing CE 3.0 debate. Current EPR systems of CE 2.0 can achieve high recovery
rates, but they do not reduce overall resource consumption and promote full circularity, in
line with CE 3.0. Thus, this chapter suggests strengthening the EPR system by proposing a
long-term transformative perspective, which can address issues concerning transparency,
inclusion, sufficiency, sustainability and continuous improvement. These lessons could
be applied to different contexts and waste streams with careful research and adaptation.
Moreover, we examined the internal consideration of the Dutch EPR system. As Circularity
in the Netherlands is inherently tied to a European and global circularity, any exports should
be strictly controlled and regulated to ensure high-value retention and sustainability.
This research further illustrates the limits of recycling and traditional recovery operations. CE
is often characterised as a tool for closing resource loops and turning wastes into resources.
However, low-quality recovery options complicate this as a closed-loop for tyres cannot
simply be established with current technologies. Whilst devulcanization could potentially
improve recovery outcomes, it is not commercially operational on a large scale and only

85

3

Chapter 3

enables the use of up to 30% secondary rubber in new tyres; still far from a closed loop.
This shows the limits of R3-10 and the importance of sufficiency strategies, especially R0-1
to reach a CE with tangible results in terms of reduced material demand and ecological
footprint. The above points are beyond the scope of this chapter and demonstrate the
complexity of the CE, and the need for specific case studies to improve its governance and
implementation.
Moreover, the insights and recommendations learned from this chapter are limited to the
recovery of tyres in the Netherlands, and further research is needed in other contexts to
develop specific and culturally adapted recommendations. In particular, transdisciplinary
research with key actors and stakeholders could be an effective manner to build solutions
for a sustainable, circular, and participatory overhaul of EPR systems.

3

Future comparative analysis of EU EPR systems is also needed to uncover how they interfere
with each other in the context of the single market. A broader study could also provide
further insights into structural issues and challenges for EPR systems in general and uncover
other possible best practices for EPR systems from a CE perspective.

86

Chapter 4
Analysing European Union Circular
Economy Policies: Words Versus Actions

This chapter is based on Calisto Friant, M., Vermeulen, W. J. V., & Salomone, R. (2021). Analysing European Union
circular economy policies: words versus actions. Sustainable Production and Consumption, 27, 337–353. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2020.11.001
Previous versions of this work were presented at the 25th International Sustainable Development Research Society
(ISDRS) Conference in Nanjing, China on the 27th of June 2019 and at the PubliER conference in Troyes, France on
the 30th of January 2020.

Chapter 4

Abstract

4

Since the publication of the European Union’s Circular Economy Action Plan in 2015, this new
sustainability paradigm has become a guiding force behind the environmental and economic
policies of the Junker Commission. The European Union (EU) has taken a particular approach
to circularity, with high expectations to increase competitiveness, promote economic growth
and create jobs while reducing environmental impacts and resource dependency. However, the
circular economy (CE) is a contested paradigm, for which many competing interpretations exist,
each seeking varying degrees of social, ecological and political transformation. Considering the
emerging and contested state of the academic literature on CE, the EU’s embrace of the concept
is a remarkable phenomenon, which remains poorly researched. The aim of this chapter is thus
to address this research gap by analysing the CE discourse and policies of the Junker Commission
(2014-2019) in order to critically discuss their sustainability implications and develop key policy
recommendations. To do so, this research uses a combination of qualitative and quantitative
research methods. The chapter first critically analyses the EU’s discourse based on a typology of
circularity discourses. It then reviews the complex set of concrete CE policies and actions adopted
by the EU and compares them to its discourse. Results show a dichotomy between words and
actions, with a discourse that is rather holistic, while policies focus on “end of pipe” solutions
and do not address the many socio-ecological implications of a circularity transition. Several
actions are thus recommended to tackle the systemic challenges of a circular future from a plural
perspective.

88

European Union Circular Economy Policies

4.1

Introduction

From a little-known concept coined in the late 20th century, the circular economy (CE) is
now recognized by the European Union (EU) as an “irreversible, global mega trend” (COM
2019/190, p10). The CE has indeed become an essential strategy in the ambition of the
Junker Commission (2014-2019) to create a “sustainable, low-carbon, resource-efficient
and competitive economy” (COM 2015/614, p6) and it is now a key component of the
European Green Deal and the Coronavirus Recovery Plan of the Von der Leyen Commission
(2019-present) (European Commission, 2020).
Embracing the idea that the CE will “modernise the EU industrial base to ensure its global
competitive edge and preserve and restore the EU’s natural capital” (COM 2019/190, p11), the
EU seems to consider the CE as a “magic bullet” that can resolve the manifold economic and
environmental challenges of the Anthropocene. However, the social, ecological and political
implications of the CE are only starting to be understood by the scientific literature (Clube
and Tennant, 2020; Geisendorf and Pietrulla, 2018; Ghisellini et al., 2016; Merli et al., 2018;
Prieto-Sandoval et al., 2018). Evidence regarding the economic, social and environmental
impacts of CE policies and practices is still lacking (Antikainen et al., 2018; Donati et al.,
2020; Hobson and Lynch, 2016; Korhonen et al., 2018a; Velis, 2018). Core challenges remain
little researched, such as the implication of the CE on the complex trade-offs and synergies
between climate change, biodiversity and resource scarcity (Bleischwitz and Miedzinski,
2018; Giampietro, 2019; Lehmann et al., 2018; Schroeder et al., 2019). The implications of the
CE for economic growth/degrowth, social justice and global sustainability also need to be
further researched and understood, especially taking into account the impacts of entropy
and the rebound effect (Mayumi and Giampietro, 2019; Millar et al., 2019; Moreau et al.,
2017; Murray et al., 2017; Temesgen et al., 2019).
Considering the emerging state of the academic literature on the topic, the impressive
growth and adoption of the concept by the EU is a remarkable phenomenon, which
deserves further research. Indeed, the CE is still a contested concept, with many different
societal actors seeking to influence its meaning and understanding with a diversity of
conflicting approaches to circularity (Calisto Friant et al., 2020; Korhonen et al., 2018b;
Lazarevic and Valve, 2017; Repo et al., 2018). By choosing one of many contrasting CE
visions, and implementing it on a large scale, the Commission will determine the future
and meaning of circularity in Europe and beyond. There are thus important conceptual
implications with the EU’s choice of circularity discourses and policies.
In this context, several academics have stressed the need to further investigate the EU’s
interpretation and implementation of the CE concept (Colombo et al., 2019; Fitch-Roy et
al., 2020; Foschi and Bonoli, 2019; Krämer, 2019; Pollex and Lenschow, 2018; Rijnhout et al.,
2018). While various articles have looked at specific aspects of the EU’s CE policies (Baran,
2020; Colombo et al., 2019; Elliott et al., 2020; Farmer, 2020; Fitch-Roy et al., 2020; Foschi

89

4

Chapter 4

and Bonoli, 2019; K. Hartley et al., 2020; Kirchherr et al., 2018; Knill et al., 2020; Krämer, 2019;
Lazarevic and Valve, 2017; McDowall et al., 2017; Milios, 2018; Moraga et al., 2019; Pollex
and Lenschow, 2018; Repo et al., 2018; Steenmans, 2019; Talens Peiró et al., 2020; Völker et
al., 2020; Wieliczko, 2019) no research so far has comprehensively analysed the discourse
and sustainability implications of the CE package of the Junker Commission30. This chapter
tackles this research gap by analysing the EU’s discourse and policies on the CE through
the discourse typology developed by Calisto Friant, Vermeulen and Salomone (2020),
which classifies and conceptually differentiates circularity visions based on their position
on fundamental social, political and ecological aspects. The aim of this research is thus to
apply the abovementioned discourse typology to the Junker Commission’s CE policy to
uncover the EU’s core vision regarding the transition towards a CE and critically assess its
key sustainability implications with respect to other possible circular futures. The research
question is hence: What discourse of the CE is advanced by the policies of the Junker
Commission (2014-2019), what sustainability implications does it have and what alternative
policies from the perspective of other circularity visions could be recommended?

4

To answer this research question, this chapter first presents its conceptual framework on the
CE (§ 4.2) and explains its research methods (§ 4.3). It then assesses the EU’s discourse on the CE,
through quantitative content analysis (§ 4.1). Section 4.4.2 reviews the EU policies on the CE,
including their core targets and regulations and section 4.4.3 critically analyses their content
based on the discourse typology developed by Calisto Friant, Vermeulen, and Salomone
(2020). Finally, the discussion reflects on these results and develops recommendations from
the perspective of other circularity visions. This research unfolds the Commission’s vision of
the CE and points out inconsistencies between the EU’s discourse and the targets and policies
which are implemented by its directives and regulations. Alternative policy directions are thus
recommended through interventions that tackle the systemic social, ecological and political
implications of a circular future in an integrated manner.

4.2

Conceptual framework

To analyse the EU’s perspective, this research uses the typology of circularity discourses
developed by Calisto Friant, Vermeulen and Salomone (2020). This typology is based
on extensive research of the CE and CE-related concepts through history, leading to a
comprehensive framework of analysis to better evaluate, untangle and navigate the many
visions of this contested paradigm. This framework is thus very well suited to understand
what circular future the EU is proposing, and what implications this has in relation to other
circular futures.

30 A Scopus search for “European Union” “circular economy” “policy analysis” OR “discourse analysis” (title, abstract,
keyword) leads to 4 results, none of which examine the CE package of the Junker Commission (search
conducted on the 10/06/2020).

90

European Union Circular Economy Policies

Table 4.1 resumes this 2x2 discourse typology, which, differentiates between holistic and
segmented discourses and between optimist or sceptical discourses (see Figure 4.1).
Segmented discourses have a homogeneous perspective that focuses only on the technical,
industrial and business components of circularity in order to improve resource efficiency.
Holistic discourses integrate the many social and political implications of circularity and
thereby also seek socio-political and cultural change. Sceptical discourses don’t believe that
socio-technical innovations could prevent an ecological collapse by decoupling economic
growth from environmental exploitation (eco-economic decoupling)31. Optimist discourses,
on the other hand, believe that socio-technical innovations can lead to eco-economic
decoupling and thereby prevent an ecological collapse (Calisto Friant et al., 2020).
Different combination of the two differentiations above leads to four core discourses on
circularity, which are presented in table 4.1. These four discourses are: reformist circular
society (optimist and holistic) seeking a prosperous, fair, democratic and sustainable future
for all through a combination of technological breakthroughs, social innovations, and
alternative business models. Technocentric circular economy (optimist and segmented) aiming
to reconcile economic and environmental imperatives through technological innovations,
especially in biotechnology, renewable energy and resource recovery. Transformational
circular society (sceptical and holistic) seeking to completely reconfigure the current societal
system and democratize and redistribute wealth and power so that humanity and nature
might live in mutual harmony. Fortress circular economy (sceptical and segmented) aiming to
secure natural resources, economic prosperity, socio-ecological resilience and geopolitical
power through top-down migration controls, technological innovations and economic
nationalism.

31 Eco-economic decoupling is defined here as the absolute decoupling of environmental degradation from
economic growth, meaning growing GDP (Gross Domestic Product) while reducing absolute environmental
impacts from production and consumption activities (Kjaer et al., 2019).

91

4

Chapter 4
TABLE 4.1 | Main components of circularity discourse typology.
4 Circularity Discourse Types

4

Discourse
component

Reformist
Circular Society
(optimist and holistic)

Technocentric
Circular Economy
(optimist and segmented)

Perspective on
technological
innovation and
ecological collapse

Optimist:
Technical innovations can
enable eco-economic decoupling
to prevent ecological collapse.

Optimist:
Technological innovations can enable
eco-economic decoupling
to prevent ecological collapse.

Approach to
socio-political
components of
circularity

Holistic:
includes social and political
implications of circularity.

Segmented:
focuses on technical, industrial
and business components of circularity.

Goals

Prosperity and wellbeing for all
within the biophysical boundaries
of the earth.

Human progress and
prosperity without negative
environmental externalities.

Means

Technological breakthroughs and
social innovations that benefit
humanity and natural ecosystems.

Economic innovations, new business
models and unprecedented
breakthroughs in CE technologies

Value-retention
focus

R2-7

R4-9

Example
concepts

- Natural Capitalism (Hawken et al.,
1999)
- Cradle to Cradle (McDonough and
Braungart, 2002)
- Performance Economy (Stahel,
2010)
- Blue economy (Pauli, 2010).

- Industrial Metabolism (Ayres and
Simonis, 1994)
- Reverse Logistics (Rogers and TibbenLembke, 1998)
- Biomimicry (Benyus, 1998)
- Industrial Symbiosis (Chertow, 2000).

Example
proponents

- Civil society discourses such as
Circle Economy, (VerstraetenJochemsen et al., 2018) and the
Club of Rome (von Weizsäcker and
Wijkman, 2017).

- National and city government policies,
corporate strategies and international
organizations (Fratini et al., 2019; Valenzuela
and Böhm, 2017).

Source: based on Calisto Friant, Vermeulen and Salomone 2020

92

European Union Circular Economy Policies

4 Circularity Discourse Types
Transformational
Circular Society
(sceptical and holistic)

Fortress C
ircular Economy
(sceptical and segmented)

Sceptical:
Technical innovations cannot bring absolute
eco-economic decoupling to prevent
ecological collapse.

Sceptical:
Technical innovation cannot bring absolute
eco-economic decoupling to prevent ecological
collapse.

Holistic:
includes social and political implications of
circularity.

Segmented:
focuses on technical, industrial and
business components of circularity.

A world of conviviality and frugal abundance
for all, while fairly distributing the biophysical
resources of the earth.

Maintain geostrategic resource security in global
conditions where widespread resource scarcity and
human overpopulation cannot provide for all.

Complete reconfiguration of the current
socio-political system and a shift away from
productivist and anthropocentric worldviews.

Innovative technologies and
business models combined with rationalized
resource use and migration and population
controls.

R0-6

R0-9

- Conviviality (Illich, 1973)
- Steady-state economics (Daly, 1977)
- PermacircularEconomy (Bourg, 2018)
- Degrowth (Latouche, 2009)
- Radical Pluralism (Kothari et al., 2019).

- The tragedy of the Commons (Hardin, 1968)
- The Population Bomb (Ehrlich, 1968)
- Overshoot (Catton, 1980).

- Social movements, bottom-up circular
initiatives, and indigenous movements
(Hobson, 2019; Kothari et al., 2019; Marin and
De Meulder, 2018).

- Think tanks and geostrategic state policies
(Cavanagh and Benjaminsen 2018; Fletcher 2012;
Hendrixson and Hartmann 2019; Mehta, Huff, and
Allouche 2019).

93

4

Chapter 4

4.3

Methods

To analyse the EU’s discourse and situate it in the classification described in table 4.1, this
research follows a mix of qualitative and quantitative methods. The quantitative analysis
adapts the methods of corpus-based research (Subtirelu and Baker, 2017) and content
analysis (Kondracki et al., 2002; Wiese et al., 2012), which were previously used in similar
contexts to examine the EU’s policies of eco-innovation (Colombo et al., 2019), to study civil
society’s sustainability transition discourses (Feola and Jaworska, 2019), to comparatively
analyse circular, bio and green economy discourses (D’Amato et al., 2017), and to contrast
EU and citizen perspectives on the CE (Repo et al., 2018).
The method used in this chapter consists of counting the frequency of a specific set of
predetermined keywords within a group of texts (corpus)32. It has been recognized as an
effective tool to systematically and objectively distinguish the core discourses, concepts,
and ideas in large groups of documents (Kondracki et al., 2002; Wiese et al., 2012). However,
the choice of keywords is subjective, and it is thus key to select them based on a solid
theoretical foundation. Therefore, the circularity discourse typology presented in section
4.2 was chosen as the basis for keyword selection to guarantee a strong conceptual validity.

Approach to social, economic, environmental and political considerations
Holistic

Segmented

Social justice, democratic
participation, and cultural change

Sceptical

Optimist

Technology, growth and innovation

Reformist Circular Society

Transformational Circular Society

Technocentric Circular Economy

Fortress Circular Economy

Planetary boundaries and collapse

FIGURE 4.1 | Circularity discourse types and their main keyword groups.

32 All queries and keyword mining were conducted with the program NVivo 12 Pro.

94

Resource efficiency

Technological innovation and ecological collapse

4

Keywords were grouped in thematic areas corresponding to the different conceptual
components of the four circularity discourse types (see Figure 4.1). The comparative
frequency of their use thus demonstrates the extent to which the EU’s official policies focus
on those topics and the circularity discourse typology that they reflect.

European Union Circular Economy Policies

The analysis is carried out in a corpus based on the 10 communications, 8 regulations and
the 7 Directives on the CE33, which have been enacted by the EU’s Junker Commission since
the Publication of the CE Action Plan in December 2015 and up to December 2019 when
the Von der Leyen commission took office. The studied corpus thus contains a total of 25
legislative documents with 300.046 words (see table 4.2). EU reports and staff working
documents were not mined for keywords as they are not legislative documents and don’t
dictate official EU positions on circularity; they might thus bring a bias to the corpus with
ideas and statements, which do not reflect the official EU stance on circularity. Moreover,
in policy reports, keywords might be used to criticize a concept rather than promote it. A
report criticising economic growth, eco-innovation, or biotechnology, for example, might use
those concepts without endorsing them. A careful revision of our query results shows that
this was not the case in the selected policy documents, as their focus is to communicate
and legislate on a specific area, not to critically analyse concepts or assess different policy
options.
TABLE 4.2 | EU Communications, Directives and Regulations on the CE.

10 communications

1.
2.
3.

COM(2015) 614 Closing the loop - An EU action plan for the Circular Economy
COM(2016) 773 Ecodesign Working Plan 2016-2019
COM(2017) 479 Investing in a smart, innovative and sustainable Industry A renewed EU Industrial
Policy Strategy
4. COM(2017) 33 final Report on the implementation of the Circular Economy Action Plan
5. COM(2018) 28 A European Strategy for Plastics in a Circular Economy
6. COM(2018) 29 On a monitoring framework for the circular economy
7. COM (2018) 32 Communication on the implementation of the circular economy package: options
to address the interface between chemical, product and waste legislation
8. COM (2018) 35 Report on the impact of the use of oxo-degradable plastic, including oxodegradable plastic carrier bags, on the environment
9. COM(2019) 22 Reflection Paper Towards a Sustainable Europe by 2030
10. COM(2019) 190 final Report on the implementation of the Circular Economy Action Plan

7 Directives

1.

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Directive (EU) 2018/849 amending Directives 2000/53/EC on end-of-life vehicles, 2006/66/EC on
batteries and accumulators and waste batteries and accumulators, and 2012/19/EU on waste
electrical and electronic equipment
Directive (EU) 2018/850 amending Directive 1999/31/EC on the landfill of waste
Directive (EU) 2018/851 amending Directive 2008/98/EC on waste
Directive (EU) 2018/852 amending Directive 94/62/EC on packaging and packaging waste
Directive (EU) 2019/883 of 17 April 2019 on port reception facilities for the delivery of waste from
ships, amending Directive 2010/65/EU and repealing Directive 2000/59/EC
Directive (EU) 2019/904 of 5 June 2019 on the reduction of the impact of certain plastic products
on the environment
Directive (EU) 2019/771 of 20 May 2019 on certain aspects concerning contracts for the sale of
goods, amending Regulation (EU) 2017/2394 and Directive 2009/22/EC, and repealing Directive
1999/44/EC

33 Directives set binding obligations on member states, such as targets, data collection processes, and policy
requirements but must be transposed into the national law of each member state in order to be implemented.
Regulations are directly applicable without the need for transposition into member state law, they establish
requirements on areas for which the EU has direct and often exclusive competencies, such as eco-design
and product-labeling requirements. Communications have no direct legal effect, rather they establish policy
directions and strategies for a topical issue, which may lead to future EU regulations or directives (Farmer, 2020).

95

4

Chapter 4

1.

2.

8 Regulations

3.
4.

5.

6.
7.
8.

4

Regulation (EU) 2019/1009 of 5 June 2019 laying down rules on the making available on the market
of EU fertilising products and amending Regulations (EC) No 1069/2009 and (EC) No 1107/2009 and
repealing Regulation (EC) No 2003/2003
Regulation (EU) 2019/424 of 15 March 2019 laying down ecodesign requirements for servers and
data storage products pursuant to Directive 2009/125/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council and amending Commission Regulation (EU) No 617/2013
Regulation (EU) 2019/1784 of 1 October 2019 laying down ecodesign requirements for welding
equipment pursuant to Directive 2009/125/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
Regulation (EU) 2019/2021 laying down ecodesign requirements for electronic displays pursuant
to Directive 2009/125/EC, amending Regulation (EC) No 1275/2008 and repealing Regulation (EC)
642/2009
Regulation (EU) 2019/2023 laying down ecodesign requirements for household washing machines
and household washer-dryers pursuant to Directive 2009/125/EC, amending Regulation (EC) No
1275/2008 and repealing Regulation (EU) No 1015/2010
Regulation (EU) 2019/2019 laying down ecodesign requirements for refrigerating appliances
pursuant to Directive 2009/125/EC and repealing Regulation (EC) No 643/2009
Regulation (EU) 2019/2024 laying down ecodesign requirements for refrigerating appliances with a
direct sales function pursuant to Directive 2009/125/EC
Regulation (EU) 2019/2022 laying down ecodesign requirements for household dishwashers
pursuant to Directive 2009/125/EC amending Regulation (EC) No 1275/2008 and repealing
Regulation (EU) No 1016/2010

The selection of keywords for the analysis was based on a detailed examination of the four
discourse types, as described by the typology, as well as a revision of their related concepts
and literature (see table 4.1). A first set of 262 keywords was thus established, which sought
to include as many relevant terms as possible. Keywords were then grouped in different
thematic areas and the selection was refined by removing or changing words that had
various meanings or that could be used in contexts that are not relevant to the object of
this research (such as refuse, reduce, share, limits etc.)34.
A further refinement of this selection of keywords was then carried out to ensure that each
opposing discourse type (holistic versus segmented and optimist versus sceptical) had the
same number of keywords and could thus be better contrasted and compared. A final set of
136 keywords was hence used in this analysis (see supplementary materials of Calisto Friant
et al. (2021) for the full list of keywords).
Sceptical and optimist discourses were distinguished by two groups of keywords, the first
representing technology, economic growth and innovation, which are the core focus of
optimist imaginaries. The second represents planetary boundaries and collapse, which are
the core components of sceptical discourses (see table I in the supplementary materials of
Calisto Friant et al. (2021)).
Similarly, holistic and segmented discourses were divided into two groups of keywords, the
first related to social justice, democratic participation, and cultural change, which represent
34 For instance, the keyword “just” might refer to “fairness”, “only” or “exactly”. The choice of keywords was therefore
carried out with great care and query results were systematically revised to ensure they are relevant to the
object of this research.

96

European Union Circular Economy Policies

the main components of holistic visions. The second relates to resource efficiency which
is the core focus of segmented discourses (see table II in the supplementary materials of
Calisto Friant et al. (2021)).
After this quantitative keyword analysis, a qualitative analysis of EU targets and policies on
the CE is carried out based on an in-depth review of the concrete measures established in
the EU directives and regulations of the examined corpus (see table 4.2). This qualitative work
first resumes the complex set of new directives, regulations and policies established by the
Junker Commission (§ 4.4.2) in order to analyse them based on the typology of circularity
visions presented in section 4.2. This allows for a critical analysis of the Commission’s CE
policies as well as an evaluation of their congruence with respect to the EU’s discourse
on the CE (§ 4.4.3). The discussion reflects on the implications of the results and suggests
alternative policy options and recommendations from the perspective of different circularity
discourses (§ 4.5).

4.4

Results

4.4.1 EU circularity discourse
Figure 4.2 resumes the main keywords found for all the discourse types. It shows that the
EU has taken an optimist approach to circularity, evidenced by a large number of keywords
in the area of technology, growth and innovation (1477 in total), as opposed to planetary
boundaries and collapse (491 in total).
Approach to social, economic, environmental and political considerations
Segmented

Social justice, democratic
participation, and cultural change
1590 results

Sceptical

Optimist

Technology, growth and innovation
1477 results

Reformist Circular Society

Transformational Circular Society

Technocentric Circular Economy

Fortress Circular Economy

Planetary boundaries and collapse
491 results

FIGURE 4.2 | Circularity discourse types and their main keywords results.

97

Resource efficiency
1495 results

Technological innovation and ecological collapse

Holistic

4

Chapter 4

Looking into further detail on the query results shows that the EU does pay close attention
to geostrategic resource security issues and seeks to build resilience, protect the EU from
the scarcity of critical raw materials and address migration (see table 4.3). Nevertheless,
an optimist approach towards economic growth, technological efficiency and innovative
business models is clearly evidenced throughout the Commission’s discourse with frequent
keywords such as business* (218 results), artificial intelligence (34 results), growth (149
results), innovation (376 results), and efficien* (339 results), while various keywords reflecting
planetary boundaries such as entropy, exhaustion, extinct*, overshoot*, overconsum* were
not used at all (see table I in supplementary materials of Calisto Friant et al. (2021) for full
query results)35.
TABLE 4.3 | Keywords in Sceptical and Optimist discursive areas.
Area

Top 7 Keywords in each group

Count

Total Keyword count

risk*
secur*
resilien*
“critical raw materials”
migra*

170
135
48
43
35

491

innovation
efficien*
technolog*
business*
growth

376
339
226
218
149

1477

Sceptical

Planetary boundaries
and collapse

Optimist

4

Technology, growth
and innovation

The picture is a bit more complex when investigating the holistic and segmented
differentiation as both discourse areas have a similar number of keyword results (see table
4.4). The EU includes many of the socio-political considerations of circularity with terms
related to human health, stakeholder cooperation and employment appearing particularly
often. Moreover, terms related to social justice, while less prevalent, are nonetheless
important with keywords such as wellbeing (33 results), inequalit* (74 results), and fair*
(59 results) appearing rather frequently (see table II I in supplementary materials of Calisto
Friant et al. (2021) for full query results).
The EU also engages strongly with resource-efficiency narratives, with key attention to
terms relating to recovery activities and waste management. Nonetheless, these do not
prevail over other issues, showing the EU has a rather comprehensive discourse. It is,
however, worth noting that the EU did not use several keywords related to cultural change
such as localiz*, downscal*, convivial*, open source, commons and simple living/voluntary
simplicity. This shows that, even though the Commission took a rather holistic approach,
it did so in an uncontroversial and reformist manner, which did not challenge modernist
35 Keywords searched with an asterisk allow for the inclusion of all their relevant variations in query results.

98

European Union Circular Economy Policies

worldviews and systemic socio-cultural structures that many see as the core elements of
the present socio-ecological crisis (Beling et al., 2018; D’Alisa et al., 2014; Escobar, 2014;
Kothari et al., 2014; Meadows, 1999).
TABLE 4.4 | Keywords in Segmented and Holistic discursive areas.
Area

Top 5 Keywords in each group

Count

Total Keyword count

recycling
repair*
“waste management”
reuse*
“energy efficiency”

407
248
172
126
74

1495

health*
safe*
stakeholder*
cooperat*
job*

223
175
123
118
115

1590

Segmented

Resource efficiency

Holistic
Social justice, democratic
participation, and cultural
change

To sum up, the EU’s discourse can be described as moderately holistic and highly optimistic,
which, overall, puts the EU in the reformist circular society discourse type.

4.4.2 Review of EU policy on the CE
This section of the results reviews the content of CE directives and regulations of the Junker
Commission (2014-2019) to assess the EU’s implementation of circularity.
4.4.2.1 Updated Waste Directives
Since the publication of the “Circular Economy Action Plan” in 2015, the EU has carried out a
wide-ranging set of policy reforms.
The Landfill of Waste Directive and the Waste Framework Directive were amended to reduce
landfilling and improve the recycling of waste (see Table 4.5 with the updated targets and
measures).
The updated Waste Framework Directive (2008/98/EC) also requires member states to
establish waste prevention programmes36 which, must contain at least the following type
of measures:
•
•
•

Encouraging the manufacture and design of resource-efficient, durable, repairable,
reusable and upgradable products.
Ensuring the conservation of critical raw materials.
Encouraging the re-use and repair of products, including the availability of spare parts
and manuals.

36 Waste prevention programmes may be part of Member State Waste Management Plans or other environmental
policy.

99

4

Chapter 4

•
•
•
•
•

Reducing industrial waste in extractive, manufacturing and construction sectors.
Reducing food waste and fostering food donation.
Reducing the content of hazardous substances in products as well as the generation
of waste that cannot be reused, repaired or recycled.
Identifying and preventing the main sources of harmful environmental littering,
especially marine litter.
Developing awareness-raising campaigns about littering and waste prevention.

TABLE 4.5 | Targets and measures of updated EU Waste Directives.
Target Year

2025

Directive (EU)
2018/851
amending
Directive
2008/98/EC on
waste

The preparing
The preparing
for re-use* and
for re-use* and
the recycling** of
the recycling** of
municipal waste is municipal waste is
increased to 55 % by increased to 60 % by
weight (Article 11.2). weight (Article 11.2)

Directive (EU)
2018/850 amending
Directive 1999/31/
EC on the landfill of
waste

4

2030

2035

All waste suitable for
recovery, shall not be
accepted in a landfill
(Article 5.3a)

The preparing
for re-use* and
the recycling** of
municipal waste is
increased to 65 % by
weight (Article 11.2)
Max amount of
municipal waste
landfilled is 10 %
(Article 5.5)

2018 levels
(Eurostat 2020)
EU municipal waste
recycling rate: 47.5%

EU landfill of waste rate:
24%

* Preparing for re-use = checking, cleaning or repairing waste products so they can be re-used without any other
pre-processing.
** Recycling = reprocessing organic and non-organic waste materials for the original or other purposes. It does not
include energy recovery nor backfilling operations and it is only counted when recycled or composted materials
are actually re-used rather than simply reprocessed.

To implement these measures, the updated Directive requires the establishment of
economic instruments including, but not limited to: landfill charges, pay-as-you-throw
systems, extended producer responsibility (EPR) systems, deposit-refund schemes,
green public procurement (GPP), phasing-out unsustainable subsidies, supporting the
development of CE technologies, and fiscal incentives for recovered or re-used products
and materials (Annex IVa and IVb). Moreover, these Waste Prevention Programs must be
elaborated with some level of public participation and cooperation (Article 31).
The directive also establishes renewed requirements for EPR schemes so that they operate
more effectively, transparently and democratically. In line with the polluter pays principle, the
amended Directive mandates that EPR systems must fully cover the costs of the separate
collection, transport, treatment and recovery of waste as well as reporting and data gathering
costs (Article 8a). It also encourages the use of eco-design policies, which account for the
impact of products throughout their lifecycle (Article 8.2). Furthermore, the Directive requires
EPR systems to have transparent governance structures with clear roles and responsibilities
and regular dialogues between relevant stakeholders from the private, public and social
sectors, including social economy actors repair networks and recyclers (Article 8a).
100

European Union Circular Economy Policies

In addition to this, the amended Waste Framework Directive restricts the export of waste
by reversing the burden of proof so the exporter must show that the waste is properly
managed to count as “recycled” (Article 11a.8).
4.4.2.2 Updated Packaging Directive
The updated Packaging Directive establishes renewed recycling targets for different types
of packaging waste (see table 4.6) and mandates the establishment of extended producer
responsibility schemes for all packaging by the 31st of December 2024 (Article 7.2). It
also requires member states to establish general preventive measures to minimise waste
generation and encourage the use of reusable packaging (Articles 4 and 5).
TABLE 4.6 | Targets and measures of the updated packaging and packaging waste Directive.
Target Year
Directive (EU) 2018/852
amending Directive
94/62/EC on packaging
and packaging waste

2017 levels
(Eurostat 2020)
65 % of all packaging
70 % of all packaging waste EU recycling rate for all
waste recycled as well as:
recycled as well as:
packaging waste: 67.5%
(i) 50 % of plastic packaging; (i) 55 % of plastic packaging; Plastic packaging: 41.7%
(ii) 25 % of wood packaging; (ii) 30 % of wood packaging; Wood packaging: 41.2 %
(iii) 70 % of ferrous metal
(iii) 80 % of ferrous metal
Metal packaging: 80.7 %
packaging;
packaging;
Glass packaging: 75.9%
(iv) 50 % of aluminium
(iv) 60 % of aluminium
Paper and cardboard
packaging;
packaging;
packaging: 85.5%
(v) 70 % of glass packaging; (v) 75 % of glass packaging;
(vi) 75 % of paper and
(vi) 85 % of paper and
cardboard packaging
cardboard packaging
(Article 6.1)
(Article 6.1)
2025

2030

4.4.2.3 New policies for plastics
The Directive on the Reduction of the Impact of Certain Plastic Products on the Environment
(EU 2019/904), places a set of measures on single-use plastics (SUPs) which are resumed in
Table 4.7. The Directive bans several SUPs including cotton buds, cutlery, stirrers, plates and
straws (Article 5). For other SUPs the Directive places consumption reduction measures,
for which member states must achieve a measurable reduction in their consumption by
2026 compared to 2022, but the EU does not prescribe specific measures to reach this
objective (Article 4). The Directive also mandates that by July 2024, SUP bottles must have
caps and lids that stay attached to the containers to avoid losses and facilitate recycling.
Moreover, all SUP bottles have separate collection targets (Article 7) and those made of
PET (Polyethylene Terephthalate) have additional targets regarding their recycled plastic
content (Article 6). Beverage cups, tobaccos, wet wipes and sanitary towels must include
clearly legible markings informing consumers of the appropriate and inappropriate waste
management options, as well as the ecological impact of mismanaged plastic (Article 7). For
all SUPs, which are not directly banned by the Directive, EPR systems must be established,
and awareness-raising measures must be put in place to encourage reusable alternatives
and reduce litter (Articles 8 and 10).
101

4

102

Fishing gear

Lightweight plastic
carrier bags

Sanitary towels

Wet wipes

Tobacco product
filters

Cups for beverages

Food containers

Each MS
must establish
measures

Consumption
reduction

Ban by
July 3rd 2021

Market
restriction

PET SUP bottles must
contain 25 % recycled
plastic by 2025 and
30% by 2030.
Caps and lids must
remain attached to
bottles

Product
design
requirement
Marking
requirement

Markings on waste
treatment options
and environmental
impacts of waste
must be placed by
July 3, 2021

4

Beverage
containers,
their caps &
lids

Containers made
of expanded
polystyrene

Oxo-degradable
plastics

Sticks for balloons

Cutlery, plates,
stirrers, straws

Cotton bud sticks

Measures
for SUPs by
plastic type

TABLE 4.7 | Measures in the EU Directive on single-use plastics.

EPR systems must
be established
by the 31st of
December 2024
in line with the
requirements of
Directive 2008/98/
EC. Moreover, new
EPRs must pay for
awareness-raising
measures of this
directive

Extended
Producer
Responsibility

77% by 2025
and 90%
by 2029

Separate
collection
objective

Must incentivise
responsible
consumer behaviour
by informing on reusable
alternatives, the
environmental
impacts of SUP,
and the best waste
management
options

Awareness-raising
measures

Chapter 4

European Union Circular Economy Policies

To deal with other plastics, the Commission has focused on establishing a voluntary pledge
with industry instead of imposing a target on the use of secondary plastic in new products.
The Commission thus created a Circular Plastics Alliance with industry partners, which
committed to ensuring that 10 million tonnes of recycled plastics are used to make new
products in the EU by 2025 (in 2016 less than 4 million tons of recycled plastics were sold in
Europe, just 8% of the market) (European Commission, 2021).
4.4.2.4 Eco-design policies
The Ecodesign Directive (2009/125/EC) has not been amended but the Ecodesign Working
Plan (2016-2019) incorporates circularity criteria along with energy, noise, and water
efficiency regulations. New ecodesign regulations were hence adopted in 2019 after
consultation processes with recyclers and producers (Talens Peiró et al., 2020) and will enter
into force between 2020 and 2021. The updated regulations include the following resource
efficiency requirements for 7 of the 28 product groups covered by the EU’s eco-design
regulations (refrigerators, dishwashers, electronic displays, washing machines, welding
equipment and servers and data storage products):
•
•
•
•
•
•

Key spare parts must be easily available to professional repairers for a minimum period
of 7 to 10 years after placing the last unit on the market.
Spare parts must be replaceable with commonly available tools.
The repair and maintenance information must be available to professional repairers for
a reasonable and proportionate fee.
The delivery of spare parts must take a maximum of 15 working days.
Some components must be marked with a visible sign to facilitate their recycling such
as certain polymers, flame retardants, and critical raw materials.
The latest version of the firmware must be available for at least 8 years, free of charge
or at a fair, transparent and non-discriminatory cost. The latest security update to the
firmware must be available free of charge for at least 8 years.

4.4.2.5 Monitoring framework
To track the circularity transition, the Commission has established a set of indicators in its
COM(2018)29 “on a monitoring framework for the circular economy” (see table 4.8). Most
indicators are shared with the EU’s Resource Efficiency Scoreboard and the Raw Materials
Scoreboard (Moraga et al., 2019). As can be seen from Table 4.8, the vast majority of
indicators don’t have respective targets or policy actions, which limits them to a purely
informative role.

103

4

Chapter 4
TABLE 4.8 | EU CE indicator framework and respective EU actions and targets.
Indicator
1. EU self-sufficiency for raw materials (%)
2. Green public procurement (GPP)
3a. Generation of municipal waste per capita (kg per capita)
3. Waste generation

3b. Generation of waste excluding major mineral wastes per GDP unit
3c. Generation of waste excluding mineral wastes per domestic material
consumption (%)

4. Food waste
(million tonnes)
5. Overall recycling
rates

5a. Recycling rate municipal waste (%)
5b. Recycling rate excluding major mineral waste (%)
6a. Overall packaging (%)
6b. Plastic packaging (%)
6c. Wooden packaging (%)

6. Recycling rates for
specific waste streams

6d. E-waste (%)
6e. Bio-waste (%)

4

6f. Construction and demolition waste (%)
7. Contribution of
recycled materials to
raw materials demand
8. Trade in recyclable
raw materials

7a. End-of-life recycling input rates (EOL-RIR)37 (%)
7b. Circular material use rate38 (%)
Imports from non-EU countries (tonnes)
Exports to non-EU countries (tonnes)
Intra-EU trade (tonnes)

9a. Gross investment in tangible goods (% GDP)
9. Private investments jobs and
9b. Persons employed (% of total employment)
gross value added
9c. Value-added at factor cost (% of GDP)
10. Patents

Number of patents related to recycling and secondary raw materials

Source: Adapted from COM(2018) 29 and Pardo and Schweitzer, (2018), figures in the last column from Eurostat,
(2020).

37 Measures, for a set of specific critical raw materials, how much of their input into the production system comes
from recycling of “old scrap”.
38 Share of material recovered and fed back into the economy as % of overall material use, for all material types.

104

European Union Circular Economy Policies

Relevant EU Targets or Actions

Latest figures

None

N/A

Only an indicative 50% GPP target (COM/2008/400)

N/A
492 kg/capita (2018)

No targets but Member State’s waste prevention programmes
are encouraged to include measures in this regard

66 kg per thousand euros (2018)

The EU has committed to SDG 12.3 to halve per capita food waste by 2030
but has no binding target

70 million tonnes
(2016)

Recycling targets and measures set in Directive (EU) 2018/851 (see table 4.5)

47.5% (2018)

No explicit targets or actions.

56% (2016)

12.8% (2018)

67% (2017)
Recycling targets and measures set in Directive (EU) 2018/852 (see table 4.6)

41.7% (2017)

Target of Directive (2012/19/EU): 65% collection rate by 2019

34.8% (2018)

No explicit target but Bio-waste must be separated and recycled at source or
separately collected by end of 2023 Directive (EU) 2018/851, article 22:

83 kg/capita (2018)

Target of old Waste Framework Directive (2008/98/EC): 70% of construction
and demolition waste recycled or recovered (including backfilling) by 2020

87% (2016)

41.2% (2017)

No targets but member states are encouraged to develop measures to
increase the share of secondary materials in total material demand
No targets, limited strengthening of export requirements outside the EU
(Directive (EU) 2018/851) and facilitation of trade of fertilizers within EU
Regulation 2019/1009

N/A
11.2% (2017)
8.9 million tonnes (2019)
25.5 million tonnes (2019)
47.9 million tonnes (2019)
0.12% (2017)

No targets, but some financial mechanisms in place to help transitionto a CE
(10 billion invested from 2015 to 2019)

1.72% (2017)
0.96% (2017)
337 patents (2015)

105

4

Chapter 4

4.4.3 Critical analysis
This section analyses the results presented in sections 4.4.1 and 4.4.2 by comparing the EU’s
discourse and policies on circularity. It uses the typology of circularity discourses (table 4.1)
as the basis of this critical reflection to better map and contrast the EU’s words and actions.
4.4.3.1 Reformist circular society discourse
What is most significant in the results from the keyword queries was perhaps not the terms
used by the EU, but those that it deliberately and strategically chose not to mention. As
Foucault states: “manifest discourse […] is really no more than the repressive presence of what
it does not say; and this ‘not-said’ is a hollow that undermines from within all that is said”
(Foucault, 1972: p.25). The “not-said” is precisely what is most telling as the EU has chosen
not to talk of rebound effects, entropy, overshoot, overconsumption and downscaling (see
§ 4.4.1). This discourse thus allows for the positioning of what Lazarevic and Valve (2017) call
a “deliberately vague, but uncontroversial, circular economy” (p.67).

4

Results demonstrate that the EU gives disproportionate attention to the technical and
economic considerations of circularity, especially compared to cultural aspects and lifestyle
transformations (see tables 4.3 and 4.4). The CE is thus viewed as an avenue for “green growth”
and the decoupling of economic growth from environmental degradation. Indeed, the EU
states that “green growth would ‘lift all the boats’” (COM(2019) 22 p.14) and mentions 11 times
that decoupling is happening or is being actively pursued (see table I in the supplementary
materials of Calisto Friant et al. (2021)).
While some social matters are addressed, such as the need to reduce inequalities, this is
conditioned on having a growing economy:“member states will work towards ensuring inclusive
and sustainable growth in the EU, a necessary condition to reduce inequality” (COM(2019) 22
p.96). Hence inequality reductions are only envisaged by better distributing future economic
benefits and not by redistributing present wealth. Moreover, this presupposes that social
equity can only be improved when the GDP increases, which assumes the capacity of the
biosphere to sustain further economic growth, despite mounting evidence of the contrary
(Hickel and Kallis, 2019; Jackson, 2016; Parrique et al., 2019; Ward et al., 2016).
This is very much in line with reformist circular society discourses, which assume the possibility
of eco-economic decoupling and promote a continued era of green growth and ecoinnovation to improve human well-being and environmental sustainability (see table 4.1).
4.4.3.2 Technocentric circular economy policies
The review of EU CE policies shows a clear focus on resource efficiency and technological
change as an avenue for circularity. Indeed, most measures and almost all targets are aimed
at improving the recycling of different types of waste (R7). Repairing (R3) is also promoted
by the updated ecodesign regulations, but it only affects a limited number of electronic
products, and there are no targets or indicators for repair activities. The most ambitious

106

European Union Circular Economy Policies

policies relate to SUP with some bans (R0 refuse) as well as consumption reduction and
awareness-raising measures (R1 reduce). Yet they only apply to a limited number of plastic
products.
While Waste Prevention Programs must now include some high-value retention options
such as reduction (R1), reuse (R2) repair (R3), upgradability (linked to R4 refurbish) and
remanufacture (R5) policies no specific targets or obligations are placed for those. Therefore,
the precise measures for those aspects of circularity are left to the discretion of member
states, which don’t have an incentive to make stringent requirements as they can hamper
the competitiveness of their economies in the single market. Therefore, while some R0 to
R5 policies are pursued, the majority of constraining policy objectives and measures are
geared towards R7 (recycling), which is the value retention focus of technocentric circular
economy visions (see table 4.1).
Furthermore, the governance implications of the CE are only partly dealt with through
the requirement that Waste Prevention Programs must be elaborated with some level of
stakeholder cooperation and participation and the need for EPR systems to have transparent
governance structures and dialogues with relevant social stakeholders (see § 4.4.2.1).
The EU’s CE policies don’t include measures directed specifically at social and cultural
aspects of circularity such as open-source technologies, sustainable sourcing of materials,
promotion of social and solidarity economies, etc. On the cultural side, only some awarenessraising measures are established in Directives 2018/851 and 2019/904, but they are rather
limited as they focus on reducing littering rather than challenging overconsumption and
materialism.
In line with technocentric circular economy discourses (see table 4.1), the EU thus implements
a depoliticized vision of circularity, where equity in the ownership of circular technology
and fairness in the distribution of its benefits is not addressed, and one where participation
amounts to little more than public consultation and information. It is a circularity policy
that assumes the possibility of decoupling between economic growth and environmental
destruction, and a CE without trade-offs and compromises in the complex nexus between
water, food, land, energy, and materials. The EU’s CE measures are thus mainly updates
of old waste policies from the late 1990’s early 2000’s (such as Directives 2008/98/EC on
waste, Directive 94/62/EC on packaging and packaging waste, and Directive 1999/31/EC
on the landfill of waste), which represent technocentric visions that mainly seek to increase
recycling rates rather than building transformative change that would shrink, slow, localize,
redistribute and democratise resource cycles (Farmer, 2020; Fitch-Roy et al., 2020; Homrich
et al., 2018; Moraga et al., 2019).
The results of this research are in line with the observations of various scholars (Colombo et al.,
2019; Fitch-Roy et al., 2020; Knill et al., 2020; Lazarevic and Valve, 2017; Pollex and Lenschow,
2018; Repo et al., 2018; Stegemann and Ossewaarde, 2018; Völker et al., 2020), which found

107

4

Chapter 4

that the EU has had a weak sustainability vision through eco-modernist discourses and
policies, which focus on techno-innovations, green growth and competitiveness rather
than reducing the EU’s ecological footprint.
4.4.3.3 Talk versus Action
From the above results, one can conclude that there is a dichotomy between EU discourse
(talk) and EU policies (actions) on the CE. Referring back to the circularity discourse matrix
(see table 4.1 and Figure 4.1), EU talk is in the optimist and holistic framing of Reformist
Circular Society discourses, while EU action falls within the segmented and optimist typology
of technocentric circular economy discourses (see Figure 4.3).
Approach to social, economic, environmental and governance considerations

Optimist

Segmented

EU “Talk”
The discourse includes social and
environmental aspects. Many topics are
covered but with a focus on competitiveness,
eco-innovation and green growth.

EU “Action”
Targets and measures based mostly on resource
efficiency and waste management with only
basic participatory and cultural elements, and
no social justice components.

Sceptical

4

Technological innovation and
ecological collapse

Holistic

FIGURE 4.3 | Circularity talk and action of the EU.

This dichotomy between discourse and policy is in line with the findings of Fitch-Roy,
Benson, and Monciardini (2019) who found that the EU’s CE policies merely place “old
wine in new bottles” (p.996) by updating waste directives and recycling targets rather than
seeking further transformative change. These findings are also in line with those of Knill,
Steinebach, and Fernández-i-Marín (2018), who evidenced a “hypocrisy” (p.375) between EU
environmental talk and action from 2000 to 2016. As they point out, this is most probably
caused by the Commission’s strategy to retain its image as an active environmental policy
entrepreneur, while also slowing down on environmental regulations to focus on economic
growth in a time of economic recovery and stagnation (Knill, Steinebach, and Fernándezi-Marín 2018). Thus, it is very likely that the Commission continued the same strategy, and,
considering that it received the Circulars Award at the World Economic Forum in 2019, this
appeared to have paid off.

108

European Union Circular Economy Policies

4.5

Discussion and recommendations

This section critically discusses the key limitations and implications of the EU’s CE policy
direction from the perspective of other circular visions to propose alternative pathways to
a sustainable circular future.

4.5.1 Targets and indicators
Of the set of policy targets and indicators chosen by the EU to measure and foster the
transition to circularity, only one relates to a social dimension (the employment indicator in
the CE Monitoring Framework (COM(2018) 29). Yet, this indicator has no mandatory target
nor accompanying policy or regulatory measure, so it is only used for monitoring purposes.
A holistic vision of circularity would have promoted many mandatory targets including, but
not limited to, job generation, investments in the social and solidarity economy, number of
cooperatives and social enterprises working on circularity, wealth and income Gini indexes,
and percentage of consumption of products with recognized socio-ecological certification
programs39. A holistic vision would also establish bans on destroying unsold stocks and
set higher restrictions on waste exports outside the EU (or even bans for certain high-risk
materials), as they not only cause high transport emissions but also move the problem
away to areas of the world which are poorly equipped to manage waste, thus creating
considerable impacts to human health and natural ecosystems (Bishop et al., 2020).
Furthermore, except for the two indicators of the CE Monitoring Framework on end-oflife recycling input rates and circular material use rate (see § 4.4.2.5.), there are no other
indicators or policy measures to incentivise a reduction of the linearity of the EU’s economy
at a macro level. Many academics have pointed out that any CE policy should ultimately
seek to reduce the overall footprint of human activities and bring our socio-economic
system in line with the biophysical boundaries of the earth (Arnsperger and Bourg, 2017;
Junnila et al., 2018; Lehmann et al., 2018; Rijnhout et al., 2018; Vita et al., 2019). The EU
currently has a material footprint per capita between 40 and 50 tons per year, way beyond
a scientifically recognized sustainable level of around 7 to 8 tons per capita per year (Hickel,
2020a; Hickel and Kallis, 2019; Mont et al., 2014; Rijnhout et al., 2018). A reduction of over
80% is thus required for Europeans to live within the biophysical limits of the earth, and it
is key for any circularity policy to go in this direction. However, research on eco-economic
decoupling has clearly evidenced that achieving such a reduction in material footprint,
while also growing GDP per capita is impossible (Albert, 2020; Haberl et al., 2020; Hickel and
Kallis, 2019; Pardo and Schweitzer, 2018; Parrique et al., 2019). Despite this inconsistency
between ecological imperatives and continued economic growth, the EU has chosen a
technocentric discourse championing the CE Action Plan as a way to “unlock the growth
and jobs potential of the circular economy” (Preamble, COM(2015) 614, p.2) and decouple
39 Such as the certifications which are members of the ISEAL Alliance like Fairtrade, MSC and FSC (Vermeulen,
2015)

109

4

Chapter 4

economic growth from environmental degradation. From a sceptical position on circularity,
many other targets and indicators would thus be necessary, such as targets to reduce per
capita waste generation, per capita material demand and per capita ecological footprint, as
well as goals on increased self-sufficiency on raw materials.
Another issue is that there are no targets for the use of secondary materials in new products,
except for SUP bottles and the voluntary commitments of the Circular Plastics Alliance (see §
4.4.2.3). Mandatory recycled content targets could boost the demand for recovered plastics
which are currently facing considerable price and market barriers (Baran, 2020; Elliott et al.,
2020; Milios et al., 2018). Facilitating the establishment of EU-wide online platforms for the
trading of circular goods (recycled materials, recovered components, repurposed products,
second-hand goods etc.) would also be beneficial in this regard (K. Hartley et al., 2020).
Another limitation of the EU’s targets is that many member states might choose to
incinerate a large amount of their waste to meet the new 10% landfill target (see § 4.4.2.1).
This could lead to higher greenhouse gas emissions and to sub-optimal uses of potentially
re-usable, recyclable or compostable resources. Settings limits to total energy recovery
rates or stronger restrictions on the incineration of recyclable wastes could address this
issue (Milios et al., 2018).

4.5.2 Eco-design

4

The revised ecodesign regulations are geared towards repairability and recyclability, as they
increase the availability of spare parts and the ease of disassembly of these products. From a
sceptical and holistic circularity perspective, these regulations would also have to encourage
other value retention options (especially R0-R5) through measures that require improved
product durability, multifunctionality, upgradeability, and modularity. They would also
need to reduce the overall ecological footprint of products by establishing mandatory
product passports and sustainability labels (such as socio-ecological impact labels) as well
as compulsory information on product durability (Pardo and Schweitzer, 2018).
From a circular society perspective, other policies would have been necessary, such as making
repair manuals completely free and open-source (and not just available to professional
repairers at a fee), as well as promoting open source innovation, such as mandating that all
hardware and software from discontinued products must become open-source. Increasing
minimum mandatory guarantee periods from 2 to 3 or more years would also be necessary,
as academics (Bihouix, 2014; Latouche, 2009; Lazarevic and Valve, 2017) and consumer
groups have been asking40.
The measures adopted by the Commission don’t reduce the high cost of repairs, which
incentivises the purchase of new products. Key measures in this regard would be a reduction
of Value-Added Tax (VAT) for reused, remanufactured, refurbished and repaired goods (and
40 Based on the presentation of Euroconsumers on the 6th of Martch at the 2019 Circular Economy Stakeholder
Conference in Brussels.

110

European Union Circular Economy Policies

repair services) (K. Hartley et al., 2020) as well as establishing subsidies for repair services to
help low-income groups (Bihouix, 2014).
Finally, it is worth noting that the eco-design regulations only apply to large electronic
goods, with rather long lifespans such as washing machines, refrigerators and dishwashers.
Fast-moving consumer electronics, such as mobile phones, tablets and computers, should
have been included to expand the scope and impact of the EU’s eco-design requirements.

4.5.3 Economic incentives
The EU broadly encourages pay-as-you-throw systems, fiscal incentives for food donations,
deposit-refund schemes, ending fossil-fuel subsidies, taxing virgin materials, and lower
VATs on recycled, repaired, remanufactured or refurbished goods. However, none of these
measures is mandatory (see § 4.4.2.1.). Thus, subsidies for fossil fuels amongst EU member
states have actually risen by 3% between 2008 and 2016, reaching a total of €55 billion a
year in 2017 prices (Rademaekers et al., 2018). This dwarfs the Commission’s investments
in the CE, which amounted to 10 billion euros between 2016 and 2019 (COM 2019/190).
Most member states have no plans to reduce their subsidies despite EU recommendations
(Rademaekers et al., 2018). Furthermore, taxes for rail transport remain higher than for
road and air in most EU member states, which further inhibits a transition to a zero-carbon
circular future (Rijnhout et al., 2018).
Holistic and sceptical circularity positions would have sought much stronger measures to
transform fiscal policy so resources (especially raw materials) are taxed instead of labour
(Antikainen et al., 2018; Arnsperger and Bourg, 2017; Lazarevic and Valve, 2017; Stahel, 2010;
von Weizsäcker and Wijkman, 2017). Eliminating financial paradises and establishing EUwide taxes on wealth and financial transactions are also seen as key measures to fund a
fair and equitable ecological transition (Piketty, 2019; Schratzenstaller and Krenek, 2019).
Mandatory circular and green public procurement requirements should also be established
to foster circular innovations by mobilizing the €2 trillion euros spent annually on public
procurement in the EU (K. Hartley et al., 2020; Milios, 2018). However, fiscal matters require
unanimity in the European Council, and this might very well be the limiting factor for
this kind of action. Nevertheless, as long as the price signals favour linear models, circular
options will likely remain niche sectors of the economy. In fact, recent reviews of the major
barriers for the CE found that market and financial factors, such as low virgin material prices
and lack of fiscal incentives, pose some of the largest barriers to a circularity transition (de
Jesus et al., 2019; de Jesus and Mendonça, 2018; Kirchherr et al., 2018; Milios et al., 2018).
The above point also demonstrates the need to democratize the EU’s decision-making
structure to better address the key socio-ecological challenges of the 21st century through
policies such as increasing transparency, improving decision-making procedures, and
establishing a citizen assembly of randomly selected EU citizens with tangible powers on
European socio-ecological policies (Kamlage and Nanz, 2017).

111

4

Chapter 4

4.5.4 Awareness raising and over-consumption
The awareness-raising obligations of the new circularity Directives stress recycling and
adequate disposal rather than consumption reduction and lifestyle change. As Bihouix (2014),
Monsaingeon (2017) and Valenzuela and Böhm (2017) argue, this discourse of circularity
through waste management creates the illusion that the present sustainability crisis can be
overcome by recycling alone. Yet, as we know from the laws of thermodynamics, there are
inevitable losses in quality and quantity in any recovery process which means it can only
supply a fraction of overall material demand (Cullen, 2017; Giampietro, 2019; Skene, 2018).
Recycling alone is thus far from enough to address the current overconsumption of natural
resources and overshoot of planetary boundaries (Bruel et al., 2019; Giampietro, 2019;
Korhonen et al., 2018a; Reuter et al., 2019; Skene, 2018; Zink and Geyer, 2017). It is thus key
not only to recycle but to also reduce overall material consumption and economic growth
(Arnsperger and Bourg, 2017; Fressoz and Bonneuil, 2016; Lorenz et al., 2018; Mayumi and
Giampietro, 2019; Millar et al., 2019).

4

Promoting awareness-raising without touching on marketing and advertising, which
is building demand for conspicuous consumption, is thus a missed opportunity for
transformative change. Indeed, no matter how eco-efficient a product is, its impact will always
be greater than if it wasn’t produced in the first place (Bihouix, 2014; Hickel, 2017; Korhonen
et al., 2018a). From a sceptical and holistic perspective on circularity, it would have been
key to promote non-material aspirations through policies, such as taxes on advertisements,
bans on commercials for ecologically harmful goods such as SUVs and reducing working
hours to 30 or less per week (Arnsperger and Bourg, 2017; Ashby et al., 2019; Cosme et al.,
2017; Latouche, 2009; Pollex and Lenschow, 2018). Moreover, encouraging convivial (Caillé,
2019) and “frugally abundant” lifestyles (Latouche, 2009), with a greater connection to both
nature and other peoples, can significantly improve quality of life, health and wellbeing
(Alexander, 2015; Caillé, 2015; D’Alisa et al., 2014; Escobar, 2018; Kallis et al., 2018; Kothari et
al., 2019; Latouche, 2018; Raworth, 2017).

4.5.5 Biodiversity and energy
Following a technocentric circular economy perspective, the EU has treated circularity, energy
and biodiversity as separate issues. However, they form a deeply interrelated nexus, and
actions taken in one area will enviably affect the other (Antikainen et al., 2018; Bleischwitz
and Miedzinski, 2018). Moreover, as Repo et al. (2018) have found, citizen groups already
see the circularity transition as an integral element of the energy and ecological transition.
The need to closely integrate EU environmental policies on energy, biodiversity, and
circularity into a holistic and coherent strategy has also been argued by many academics
(Kaźmierczyk, 2018; McDowall et al., 2017; Milios, 2018; Repo et al., 2018; Rijnhout et al., 2018;
Wuttke, 2018).

112

European Union Circular Economy Policies

The EU currently has no targets or indicators linking its CE strategy to its biodiversity strategy
and there is a deep necessity to do so as we are now in the midst of a biodiversity crisis on
the scale of a mass extinction event (IPCC, 2019; von Weizsäcker and Wijkman, 2017). The
midterm review of the EU’s Biodiversity Strategy (COM/2015/0478) found that its headline
target to “halt the loss of biodiversity and the degradation of ecosystem services in the EU
by 2020” will most likely not be reached. In fact, biodiversity is continuously decreasing
throughout the EU due to the destruction of habitats, the rise in artificial surfaces, the
impacts of industrial agriculture and the gross overexploitation of marine resources (Krämer,
2019). A review of the Common Agricultural Policy is key to reduce this trend, especially
if a holistic approach is taken that subsidises farmers based on the social and ecological
services they provide to their communities rather than based on the size of their farms
(De Schutter, 2019; Frantzeskaki et al., 2019; Scown et al., 2020; Wieliczko, 2019). Setting
mandatory targets to reduce food waste and promoting healthier plant-based diets are also
key in this regard as food waste and meat production have significant impacts on climate
change and biodiversity (Allen and Hof, 2019; Niles et al., 2018; Springmann et al., 2018;
Stoll-Kleemann and Schmidt, 2017; Vita et al., 2019).
On a positive note, it is worth noting that the EU has already reached its 2020 goal for a
20 % reduction in EU greenhouse gas emissions from 1990 levels, and will likely reach its
40% goal for 2030 (Krämer, 2019). Discussions in the EU are carried out in 2020 to establish
a European Green Deal with a 2050 climate neutrality target (Von Der Leyen, 2019). These
steps are important, but according to many civil society organizations, this is not enough, as
they seek a 2040 target for net-zero emissions to keep the earth within the goal of limiting
temperature rise to 1.5 degrees Celsius as established in the Paris Climate Agreement (CAN,
2018; Greenpeace, 2018; WWF, 2018). Other citizen groups demand an even earlier 2025
date to reach both net zero-emissions and net-zero biodiversity loss (Extinction Rebellion,
2019). Recent academic research finds that, to achieve the Paris Agreement targets, climate
neutrality must be reached between 2030 and 2040 (Hickel and Kallis, 2019; Höhne et al.,
2019; Nieto et al., 2019). These dates are closer to some civil society demands than to current
EU policies. Moreover, various academics have also suggested that the scale and speed of
this transition means that the Paris Agreement objectives can most likely only be achieved
through a post-growth strategy (Jackson and Victor, 2019; Nieto et al., 2019). This questions
the EU’s insistence on the CE as an avenue for low-carbon economic growth.
On the other hand, the CE can play a key role in a zero-carbon ecological transition as
production and consumption processes account for 45% of greenhouse gas emissions
(GHG) (the other 55% corresponds to energy provision) (Ellen MacArthur Foundation and
Material Economics, 2019). Recycled materials generate much less GHG emissions than
virgin ones (Aurez et al., 2016), and eliminating landfilling and reducing food waste can
significantly reduce GHG emissions (Hawken, 2017; Jurgilevich et al., 2016). Moreover,
reducing demand for goods through longer use rates and simple living and convivial
lifestyle transformations is key to reducing GHG emissions (Bengtsson et al., 2018; Nieto
113

4

Chapter 4

et al., 2019; Vita et al., 2019). Furthermore, regenerative agriculture and agroecology can
create circular food systems with significant climate change mitigation and adaptation
benefits (Del Borghi et al., 2020; Jurgilevich et al., 2016; Reynaud et al., 2019). Nonetheless, a
mismanaged CE transition could also hamper mitigation targets by overly relying on energy
recovery, biofuels and bio-materials, which generate substantial amounts of GHG emissions
and increase the land-use change pressure on biodiversity (Bihouix, 2014; Heck et al., 2018).
Moreover, energy is needed to recycle any end-of-life product or material. A CE can thus
increase the demand for high-temperature heat, which is hard to obtain from renewable
sources of energy (Cullen, 2017). To manage these complex trade-offs and synergies, it is
key to integrate the climate, ecological and circularity transitions from a holistic perspective.
Policies, in this regard, are lacking at the EU level (Kaźmierczyk, 2018; Repo et al., 2018;
Rijnhout et al., 2018; Wuttke, 2018) and could include carbon tariffs for imported goods,
and consumer taxes based on the ecological footprint of products as well as redistributive
policies to ensure that the economic burden does not fall on the most vulnerable (Arnsperger
and Bourg, 2017; Frantzeskaki et al., 2019; Piketty, 2019; Vita et al., 2019). Increased financing
and technology transfer to the Global South for climate change, biodiversity and circularity
projects would also be required from a holistic perspective to facilitate the global ecological
transition.

4

4.5.6 Towards a plural policy mix
This chapter has presented a total of 32 alternative policy options to improve the EU’s
CE package from a plural perspective that goes beyond its current technocentric circular
economy focus. The full list of policy suggestions is presented in table 4.9, which classifies
each policy based on the value retention option it focuses on. The diversity of policy
recommendations derived from this research address all 10Rs, including the highest
and most sustainable Rs in the value retention hierarchy (R0-R6) (Reike et al., 2018a). This
demonstrates that a plural understanding of the topic, which embraces the perspective
of many alternative circularity visions, can lead to a more comprehensive policy approach
compared to the package of the Junker Commission, which disproportionally focuses on
R7. Furthermore, some recommendations go beyond the 10Rs by adding key social justice
and fairness elements, which are essential components of a circularity transition, yet remain
ill-recognised by the literature (Hobson and Lynch, 2016; Millar et al., 2019; Moreau et al.,
2017; Temesgen et al., 2019).

114

European Union Circular Economy Policies
TABLE 4.9 | Policy alternatives based on a plurality of circularity visions.
R-focus

Circularity
discourse

Policies

Discussed
in §

R8

All

Establish limits to total energy recovery rates and/or stricter
restrictions on the incineration of recyclable, re-usable or
compostable wastes

4.5.1

R7-9

RCS and TCS

Heavily restrict or ban the export of waste outside the EU

4.5.1

R4-7

All

Ban the destruction of unsold stocks

4.5.1

R4-7

All

Establish a mandatory product passport with information on all
materials and components to facilitate product and material recovery

4.5.2

R3-7

All

Expand eco-design regulations to fast-moving consumer electronics
such as mobile phones, tablets and computers

4.5.2

R3-6

RCS and TCS

Promote open-source innovation (e.g. by mandating that all
hardware and software from discontinued products becomes open
source)

4.5.2

R3

RCS and TCS

Improve eco-design regulations to ensure repair manuals are
completely free and open-source

4.5.2

R3

RCS and TCS

Establish subsidies for repair services to help low-income groups

4.5.2

R2-9

All

Establish EU-wide online platforms for the trading of secondary
materials and products

4.5.1

R2-6

All

Reduce VAT for reused, remanufactured, refurbished and repaired
goods and repair services

4.5.2

R1-8

RCS and TCS

Tax resources (especially raw materials) instead of labour

4.5.3

R1-8

All

Eliminate subsidies on fossil fuels

4.5.3

R1-7

Establish mandatory circular and green public procurement targets
TCE, RCS and TCS
and requirements

R1-7

All

Establish targets on the percentage of secondary materials or
sustainable renewable materials in new products and buildings

4.5.1

R1-5

All

Improve eco-design regulations by adding measures on product
durability, multifunctionality, upgradeability, and modularity

4.5.2

4.5.3

R1-3

RCS and TCS

Increase minimum mandatory guarantee periods

4.5.2

R1

All

Establish mandatory targets to reduce food waste

4.5.5

R0-7

TCS and FCE

Establish targets to reduce per capita waste generation, per capita
material demand and per capita ecological footprint, and to increase
self-sufficiency in raw materials

4.5.1

R0-1

RCS and TCS

Revise the Common Agricultural Policy to subsidise farmers based on
the social and ecological services they provide

4.5.5

R0-1

RCS and TCS

Mandate compulsory information on product durability, especially
for electronic goods

4.5.2

R0-1

RCS and TCS

Establish mandatory sustainability labels (with product socioecological impact)

4.5.2

R0-1

RCS and TCS

Promote healthier plant-based diets

4.5.5

R0-1

TCS

Taxes on advertisements and bans on commercials for ecologically
harmful goods such as SUVs

4.5.4

R0-1

TCS and FCE

Establish carbon tariffs for imported goods

R0-1

RCS and TCS

Update consumer taxes (VAT) based on the socio-ecological
footprint of products

115

5.5
4.5.5

4

Chapter 4

R-focus

Circularity
discourse

Policies

Discussed
in §

R0

TCS

Promote non-material aspirations and values and slower, and more
convivial ways of life to improve human wellbeing while reducing
material consumption

4.5.4

Beyond Rs TCS

Reduce working hours to 30 or less per week

4.5.4

Beyond Rs RCS and TCS

Establish targets on social aspects of circularity (e.g., job generation,
investments in cooperatives and social enterprises working on CE,
and percentage of consumption with a recognized socio-ecological
certification program)

4.5.1

Beyond Rs RCS and TCS

Democratize the EU’s decision-making structure by increasing
transparency, improving decision-making procedures and
establishing an EU-wide citizens’ assembly

4.5.3

Beyond Rs RCS and TCS

Develop redistributive policies to ensure that the economic burden
of a circularity transition does not fall on the most vulnerable

4.5.5

Beyond Rs RCS and TCS

Eliminate financial paradises and establish EU-wide taxes on wealth
and financial transactions

4.5.3

Beyond Rs RCS and TCS

Increased financing and technology transfer to the Global South for
climate change, biodiversity and circularity projects

4.5.5

RCS = Reformist Circular Society
TCS = Transformational Circular Society
TCE = Technocentric Circular Economy
FCE = Fortress Circular Economy
R0-10 = Value retention focus of each policy option based on R-hierarchy developed by Reike et al., (2018)
Beyond Rs = Policy option addresses socio-ecological concerns, which are beyond the value-retention hierarchy

4

4.6

Conclusion

Considering the complexity of policymaking between 28 sovereign states, the CE policies
that the Commission has managed to pass are quite an achievement. The EU’s circularity
train has been started, with lots of expectations on its social, environmental and economic
benefits. Yet, more holistic long-term thinking will be needed, to ensure that EU policies
don’t remain stuck in end-of-pipe solutions and actually bring about tangible socioecological change.
The EU’s focus on closing resource cycles will without a doubt create an unprecedented
boost for the recycling industry. However, this technocentric circular economy perspective
will not significantly contribute to the shrinking, slowing, redistributing and democratizing
of resource cycles. Most importantly, by focusing on growth and competitiveness rather
than human well-being and ecosystem health, the EU might be creating new business
opportunities for some, while doing little towards addressing the core socio-ecological
challenges of the 21st century.
Considering the influence and power of the Commission, its choice of CE vision will impact
the implementation of circularity policies well beyond its borders. By setting a reformist
circular society discourse and technocentric circular economy policies, the EU is sending a

116

European Union Circular Economy Policies

key signal to remain a global leader in environmental policymaking, while doing little to
seriously disrupt linear business models and practices within its borders.
This chapter fills an important research gap as there are still few studies on the EU’s CE
discourse and policies. The policy options and recommendations developed by this chapter
can thus be relevant for both practitioners and academics seeking to better understand CE
implementation. They might also be useful for the development of circularity policies at the
member state and EU levels as well as outside the EU.
Moreover, this research tests the usefulness of the circularity discourse typology to open
the imaginary on the CE and develop more inclusive and holistic pathways to sustainable,
fair and resilient circular futures. By evidencing which visions are missing the discourse
typology can help bring new ideas and perspectives to the table. This allows for better and
more comprehensive policymaking, which tackles the systemic and long-term challenge of
sustainability from a plural perspective.
One of the core limitations of this research is that the state of implementation of the EU’s CE
policies has not been assessed, mainly because European CE policies are so recent that it is
too early to measure their outcomes. Moreover, the political process of policy formulation
was not analysed as it is beyond the scope of this chapter. The circularity discourse typology
could provide a solid framework to analyse the EU’s political decision-making process in
order to understand what actors and discourses were included, and which ones were
excluded and why. It can thus help understand whether the process was democratic,
plural and deliberative. Moreover, this research focuses on the Junker Commission (20142019), a similar study would be valuable for the Von der Leyen Commission (2019-present)
and its European Green Deal. Overall, further research on CE policy formulation and
implementation is needed and, in doing so, the circularity discourse typology can be a
useful methodological and conceptual tool.

117

4

Chapter 5
Transition to a Sustainable Circular
Plastics Economy in The Netherlands:
Discourse and Policy Analysis

This chapter is based on Calisto Friant, M., Lakerveld, D., Vermeulen, W. J., & Salomone, R. (2022). Transition to a
Sustainable Circular Plastics Economy in The Netherlands: Discourse and Policy Analysis. Sustainability, 14(1), 190.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su14010190
A previous version of this research was presented at the 26th International Sustainable Development Research
Society (ISDRS) Conference in July 2020.

Chapter 5

Abstract
The circular economy (CE) has become a key sustainability discourse in the last decade. The
Netherlands seeks to become fully circular by 2050 and the EU has set ambitious circularity
targets in its CE Action Plan of 2015. The plastics sector, in particular, has gained a lot of attention
as it is a priority area of both the EU and Dutch CE policies. However, there has been little research
on the different and often contested discourses, governance processes and policy mechanisms
guiding the transition to a circular economy and society. This chapter aims to fill these gaps by
asking what circular discourses and policies are being promoted in the Netherlands and what
sustainability implications and recommendations can be drawn from it. It does so through a mix
of media analysis, policy analysis, semi-structured interviews, and surveys using Q-methodology.
Results indicate a dominance of technocentric imaginaries, and a general lack of discussion
on holistic, and transformative visions, which integrate the full social, political, and ecological
implications of a circular future. To address those challenges, this research brings key policy
insights and recommendations which can help both academics and practitioners better
understand and implement the transition towards a sustainable circular plastics economy.

5

120

Circular Plastics Economy in The Netherlands

5.1

Introduction

The unsustainable accumulation of plastic waste has often been described as one of
the most pressing environmental challenges of our time (European Commission, 2018;
UNEP, 2018). The global consumption of synthetic polymers (hereafter: plastics) has risen
20-fold since 1960, and is projected to keep rising by 3.8% per year (it will thereby triple
from now to 2050) (UNEP, 2018; WEF et al., 2016). Yet, only about 9% of all plastic waste
generated by humanity until 2015 has been recycled, the rest was either incinerated (12%)
or ended up in landfills and the environment (79%) (Geyer et al., 2017). Nevertheless, it
is undeniable that plastics provide key benefits to global economies as they are cheap,
versatile, multifunctional and lightweight materials that often substitute the use of scarce
resources and materials which often have higher environmental footprints (Bucknall, 2020).
They also have valuable health and safety applications, such as protecting from biohazards,
preventing food contamination, ensuring access to clean water and sanitation, and
securing the hygiene of medical devices etc. (Klemeš et al., 2021) However, dealing with
plastic waste sustainably and responsibly remains a monumental challenge. Plastic waste
presents a significant threat to biodiversity as an incalculable number of animals die due to
plastic ingestion or entanglement every year and many more are affected by the toxicity of
plastic compounds and additives that leach into the environment (Azevedo-Santos et al.,
2021; Law, 2017; Li et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2019). Plastics also present a risk to human health,
with micro and nano-plastics now present virtually everywhere, including table salt (Karami
et al., 2017), beer (Liebezeit and Liebezeit, 2014), honey and sugar (Liebezeit and Liebezeit,
2013), tap water (Kosuth et al., 2018) and even the air we breathe (Rist et al., 2018). Research
has linked plastic production, use and pollution to various serious diseases including cancer
(Brophy et al., 2012; DeMatteo et al., 2013; Y.-L. Wang et al., 2020), endocrine system disorders
(Andra and Makris, 2012; Brophy et al., 2012; Darbre, 2020), reproductive hazards (DeMatteo
et al., 2013; Manikkam et al., 2013; Yin et al., 2021) and obesity, diabetes and cardiovascular
diseases (Biemann et al., 2021; Manikkam et al., 2013; Nadal, 2013). Moreover, producing,
transporting, and recycling plastics produces significant amounts of greenhouse gases,
thereby exacerbating global warming (Vollmer et al., 2020).
The circular economy (CE) is often promoted as a solution to these problems as it could allow for
the elimination of plastic waste through innovative recovery processes, bio-based alternatives
and reuse and reduce solutions. Various initiatives have thus been created to foster a CE
transition for the plastic sector such as the ‘Global Commitment’ lead by the Ellen MacArthur
Foundation (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2021), the ‘European Plastic Pact’ initiated by France,
the Netherlands and Denmark (European Plastics Pact, 2021) and the ‘Circular Plastics Alliance’
established by the European Commission (European Commission, 2021).
The Dutch government, in particular, has set the ambitious target to become 100% circular
by 2050 and its Circular Economy Action Plan focuses on plastics as a strategic sector to
lead the transition (Government of Netherlands, 2016). Despite having a strong plastic
121

5

Chapter 5

waste management system with high recovery figures (with a 99% combined recycling and
incineration rate for plastic packaging), the Netherlands is still facing key challenges. Indeed,
Dutch plastic consumption continues to rise, and a proportion of its plastic waste is leaked
to third countries and ends up in the environment (Bishop et al., 2020; Brooks et al., 2018).
Moreover, nearly 50% of end-of-life plastics in the Netherlands are incinerated instead of
recycled (Brouwer et al., 2019).
The transition to a CE for plastics in the Netherlands, therefore, remains a significant
challenge. Yet, there has been very limited research on the topic as there are just over a
dozen academic papers on the CE of plastics in the Netherlands41. Previous research on
the topic has focused on analysing bio-plastic alternatives (Blok et al., 2019; Bluemink et al.,
2016; van Leeuwen et al., 2018), consumer habits (Núñez-Cacho et al., 2020) and polymer
recycling practices and innovations (Brouwer et al., 2018; Cramer, 2018; Demacsek et
al., 2019; Leslie et al., 2016; McCarville, 2019; Picuno et al., 2021; Stevels and Smit, 2019).
However, studies have not analysed the policies and discourses of the CE transition for the
plastic sector in the Netherlands. Yet this is a key question as the CE is a contested and
diverse concept that can lead the CE transition in many different directions, with different
socio-ecological implications, depending on the specific discourse and vision of circularity
which is implemented (Calisto Friant et al., 2020; Genovese and Pansera, 2020; Korhonen et
al., 2018b; Lazarevic and Valve, 2017). This chapter, therefore, addresses this key research gap
by answering the following research question:
What are the main discourses in the transition towards a sustainable circular
plastics economy in the Netherlands and what implications and recommendations
can be drawn from it?

5

To answer this question this research conducts a policy, media, and stakeholder analysis
as well as 24 semi-structured expert interviews, and a survey and statistical factor analysis
with Q-methodology. After presenting the methods, and results, this chapter discusses
the significance of these findings and brings key policy recommendations which can help
both academics and practitioners better understand and implement a sustainable circular
plastics economy.

5.2

Methodology

This research uses a single case study approach using Q-methodology to provide an indepth understanding of the different discourses and policies in the transition towards a
sustainable circular plastics economy in the Netherlands.
Q-methodology is an interdisciplinary holistic mixed (quantitative and qualitative) research
method, which was first introduced by Stephenson in 1935 (Barry and Proops, 1999). The
41 Based on a Scopus search for “circular economy” AND netherlands AND plastic* OR polymer* (Title, Abstract,
Keywords) conducted on the 19th of July 2021, finding a total of 13 results.

122

Circular Plastics Economy in The Netherlands

purpose of a Q study is to identify and represent different perspectives regarding a particular
topic (Brown, 1980; Watts and Stenner, 2005). It is a commonly used method for discourse
analysis as it identifies how different societal groups align with certain viewpoints, ideas,
and beliefs (Curry et al., 2013; Stevenson, 2015).
Q-methodology can also be applied to elicit alternative policies and solutions to address
a particular topic or issue (Zabala et al., 2018). For instance, Stevenson (2015) used
Q-methodology to identify the underpinning green political economy discourses and
solutions (Stevenson, 2015); Ellis et al. (2007) used it to investigate the acceptability of
different wind farm proposals (Ellis et al., 2007); Gall and Rodwell, (2016) used it to evaluate
the social acceptability of marine protected areas (Gall and Rodwell, 2016); and Curry et al.,
(2013) used it to analyse environmental and resource dimensions of sustainability policies
(Curry et al., 2013). It is thus particularly well suited to the present research question, as it
allows us to clearly and systematically identify different societal discourses in the transition
towards a sustainable circular plastics economy in the Netherlands as well as to evaluate
different policy options and assess their acceptability amongst different societal groups.
This research followed a 5 stage Q-methodology process, adapted from Webler et al. (2009)
(see Figure 5.1) (Webler et al., 2009). First, we establish the conceptual framework which
provides us with the conceptual lens with which to better understand and analyse the
diverse discourses surrounding the transition to a sustainable circular plastics economy in
the Netherlands. Second, we define the concourse on the topic, which means mapping the
wide variety of stakeholder perspectives and viewpoints on the study object (Brown, 1980).
This is done through a mix of media and stakeholder analysis, policy analysis and semistructured interviews. A set of representative statements on the topic, called the Q-sample,
are then derived from the concourse (Zabala et al., 2018)(stage 3). In a fourth stage,
respondents (the Participant set or P-set) are asked to answer a survey where they rank
the chosen set of statements (Q-sample) based on individual viewpoint and preference.
This process is called ‘Q-sorting’ and it is a key part of the Q-methodology as this is how the
participant’s underlying discursive position on the studied topic is revealed (Brown, 1993).
The Q-sorting process is followed by factor analysis that evidences groups of respondents
who sorted the set of statements (Q-sample) similarly (stage 5). These groups of similar
responses are combined into ‘factors’, which reflect a district discourse on the studied topic.

FIGURE 5.1 | Research method and process.

123

5

Chapter 5

5.2.1 Stage 1: Conceptual framework
5.2.1.1 Circularity discourses
The CE has become a key sustainability discourse in the last 10 years. It is now a major
component of many environmental policies in various industries and countries, especially
in China where the concept has been part of national policy since 2002 (Qi et al., 2016) and
in the EU, which adopted a comprehensive CE “Action Plan” in 2015 (McDowall et al., 2017).
However the origins of the concept date back much further to ideas such as the Economy
of Permanence (Kumarappa, 1945), The Limits to Growth (D. Meadows et al., 1972),
Industrial Ecology (Frosch and Gallopoulos, 1989), Steady-State Economics (Daly, 1977),
Ecological Design (Papanek, 1972) etc. The CE is thus best understood as an umbrella
concept, which encompasses a plurality of different visions and ideas, all of which seek
to establish sustainable resource and energy cycles so humanity can live in harmony with
the biophysical limits of the Earth (Calisto Friant et al., 2020). Nevertheless, the CE is still
an “essentially contested concept” in the public and academic debate with many actors
proposing different CE visions based on their economic and political interests (Korhonen
et al., 2018b).
To better navigate and understand these differences, this research uses the discourse
typology developed by Calisto-Friant et al. (2020), which has also been used to analyse the
EU’s CE policies (Calisto Friant et al., 2021), CE discourses in Norway (Hermann and Pansera,
2020; Ortega Alvarado et al., 2021), the European plastics strategy (Palm et al., 2021) and
competing CE discourses in Australia (Melles, 2021).

5

The abovementioned typology divides circularity discourses based on two main criteria
(see Figure 5.2). First, whether discourses have a holistic approach by including the social
justice and political empowerment dimensions of circularity or a segmented approach
by focusing only on technical and economic means to eco-efficiency. Second, whether
discourses are optimist or sceptical regarding the possibility of decoupling environmental
degradation from economic growth (eco-economic decoupling). Different combinations
of the above criteria lead to 4 main circularity discourse types42:
Reformist Circular Society (optimist and holistic) discourses seek to create a sustainable
circular future through a combination of innovative business models, social policies and
technological breakthroughs (such as Cradle to Cradle (McDonough and Braungart, 2002),
the Blue Economy (Pauli, 2010) and Natural Capitalism (Hawken et al., 1999)).
Technocentric Circular Economy (optimist and segmented) seek to reconcile economic
development with ecological sustainability through innovative business models and
technological breakthroughs, especially in resource recovery, biotechnology and renewable
42 More information of each discourse is available in the following article: A Typology of Circular Economy
Discourses: Navigating the Diverse Visions of a Contested Paradigm, (2020) Resources Conservation & Recycling,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2020.104917

124

Circular Plastics Economy in The Netherlands

energy (such as Bioeconomy(OECD, 2004), Reverse Logistics (Rogers and Tibben-Lembke,
1998), and Industrial Metabolism(Ayres and Simonis, 1994)).
Transformational Circular Society (sceptical and holistic) discourses seek to create a fair,
democratic, de-colonial and sustainable post-capitalist future where humanity and nature
live in mutual harmony by re-localizing and redistributing power, wealth and knowledge
(such as degrowth (Latouche, 2009), buen vivir (Gudynas and Acosta, 2011) and steadystate economics (Daly, 1977)).

Approach to social, economic, environmental and governance considerations

Optimist

Segmented

Reformist Circular Society
- Assumptions: eco-economic decoupling is possible and
social justice and democracy is key for a circularity
transition.
- Goal: human prosperity and well-being within the
biophysical boundaries of the earth.
- Means: Technological breakthroughs and social policies
that benefit humanity and natural ecosystems.
- Example concepts: Natural Capitalism, Cradle to Cradle,
The Performance Economy, The Natural Step, The Blue
Economy, Eco-system economy, Regenerative Design.
- Proponents: international organizations, large foundations and some governments.

Technocentric Circular Economy
- Assumptions: eco-economic decoupling is possible and
social justice and democracy is not key for a circularity
transition.
- Goal: economic prosperity and development without
negative environmental externalities.
- Means: economic innovations, new business models and
unprecedented breakthroughs in CE technologies
- Example concepts: Industrial Ecology, Reverse
Logistics, Biomimicry, Industrial Symbiosis, Cleaner
Production, Bioeconomy.
- Proponents: corporations, some national and city
governments, and international organizations.

Sceptical

Technological innovation and ecological collapse

Holistic

10003

Fortress Circular Economy (sceptical and segmented) seek to ensure biophysical stability and
geostrategic resource security, through technological innovations and top-down controls on
population and economic shortages (such as the Tragedy of the Commons (Hardin, 1968),
The Population Bomb (Ehrlich, 1968), and Catton’s Overshoot (Catton, 1980)).

Transformational Circular Society
- Assumptions: eco-economic decoupling is impossible and
social justice and democracy is key for a circularity
transition.
- Goals: A world of conviviality and frugal abundance for all,
while fairly distributing the biophysical resources of the
earth
- Means: Complete reconfiguration of the current socio-political system and a shift away from productivist and
anthropocentric worldviews.
- Example concepts: Conviviality, Steady-state economics,
Permacircular Economy, Degrowth, Social Ecology,
Buddhist Economics, Buen Vivir, Ubuntu.
- Proponents: social movements, bottom-up circular
initiatives, and indigenous movements.

Fortress Circular Economy
- Assumptions: eco-economic decoupling is impossible and
social justice and democracy is not key for a circularity
transition.
- Goal: maintain geostrategic resource security in global
conditions where widespread resource scarcity and human
overpopulation cannot provide for all.
- Means: innovative technologies and business models
combined with rationalized resource use and migration
and population controls.
- Example concepts: The tragedy of the Commons, The
Population Bomb, Overshoot, Disaster Capitalism,
Capitalist Catastrophism.
- Proponents: Geostrategic think tanks and state policies.

FIGURE 5.2 | Circularity discourse typology (adapted from Calisto Friant, et al., 2020).

5.2.1.2 Plastics and circularity
Future trends show that the production of virgin plastics will increase at a faster pace than
the development and deployment of related after-use systems and infrastructure(UNEP,
2018; WEF et al., 2016). Therefore, strong CE actions are required to reverse this trend on

125

5

Chapter 5

both the demand side (through refuse, reduce, reuse, and replace strategies) and the supply
side (through better plastic waste collection and recovery systems). Each of these actions
has a multitude of social, economic and environmental implications, which remain poorly
researched and understood (Barrowclough and Birkbeck, 2020).
Choices between different recovery strategies or plastic alternatives involve complex
trade-offs between economic considerations and ecological imperatives. Moreover,
social components are essential, as a sustainable circular plastics economy will inevitably
necessitate behavioural change (reduced consumption, better sorting, switch to re-usable
packaging etc.) and will lead to unavoidable costs and benefits, which must be equitably
distributed within society (through progressive taxation and social policies) (Barrowclough
and Birkbeck, 2020).

5

Moreover, recovery systems in Global North are currently dependent on the export of
plastic waste to the Global South (Brooks et al., 2018). However, the impact of indiscriminate
export of end-of-life plastics to the Global South poses key social and environmental justice
concerns. Indeed, waste is often exported to countries where working conditions and
environmental standards are relatively low, and which have limited administrative and
technological capacity to control mismanaged waste (Barnes, 2019; Bishop et al., 2020). This
not only increases the amount of plastic that ends up polluting natural ecosystems, but also
exacerbates human health problems related to unsafe recovery systems. The ban that China
placed on the import of most plastic waste in 2018 has brought light to this issue (Brooks et
al., 2018). This also led to the 2019 Norwegian Amendment to the Basil Convention on the
export of hazardous waste, which aims to increase the regulation and transparency of the
international trade of plastic waste (Barrowclough and Birkbeck, 2020). The above trends
have created a renewed momentum for countries in Global North to transition towards a
sustainable circular plastics economy (Syberg et al., 2021).
To operationalize this objective and create a CE for plastics, there are many interrelated
actions and strategies that countries may use. These can be categorized through the 10R
hierarchy of CE “action imperatives” developed by Reike et al. (2018) (see Table 5.1 below).
This 10R framework not only helps visualize the range of policy options for the transition
to a sustainable circular plastics economy, but it also helps reveal stakeholder discourses
on CE. Indeed, the research of Calisto Friant et al. shows that different circularity discourses
focus on a different set of Rs: Technocentric Circular Economy is associated with R4-R9 as it
is mostly concerned with industrial and recycling solutions, a Reformist Circular Economy
with R2-R7 as it is highly focused on innovative service-based business models and sharing
economies, a Transformational Circular Society with R0-R6 as it seeks to build social and
solidarity economies focused on sufficiency and autonomy, and a Fortress Circular Economy
with R1-R9 as it pragmatically engages with all value retention options from a top-down
perspective (Calisto Friant et al., 2020).

126

Circular Plastics Economy in The Netherlands

In addition to the above value retention hierarchy, it is important to differentiate bio-based,
biodegradable and fossil-based plastics. Bio-based plastics are polymers made from natural
organic matter such as corn, wood, and palm oil (Bucknall, 2020). Not all bio-based plastics
are biodegradable but many of them are. Those which are biodegradable, however, often
only effectively biodegrade in industrial composting facilities (Mah, 2021). Depending on
the type of biomaterial used, the carbon footprint of bio-based plastics can be anywhere
from 85% lower to 50% higher than that of fossil-based plastics (Simon, 2019). However,
bio-based plastics compete for limited land resources with biodiversity conservation, food
production and renewable energy generation (Verrips et al., 2019). They can therefore
increase food insecurity and intensify the collapse of biodiversity (Stafford and Jones,
2019). While only about 1% of plastics in the world are bio-based, they can pose significant
problems to recovery systems, which are currently not designed to recycle or compost
them (Verrips et al., 2019).
TABLE 5.1 | 10R framework applied to plastics.
R’s
R0
R1
R2
R3

R4
R5
R6
R7
R8
R9

Value Retention Options
Refuse: buying and consuming less plastics products and packaging and replacing the use of plastic
materials and packaging during product design.
Reduce: reducing plastic usage, by using less plastic material by unit of output and improving
recyclability by using only one type of plastic and avoiding harmful chemical additives.
Resell/Reuse: reusing packaging through reusable containers, deposit-return systems and bulk buying
etc. and re-using products through sharing platforms and second-hand markets.
Repair: extending the lifetime of a plastic product by repairing components when broken rather than
discarding them, this can be done directly by producers through guarantee systems or by citizens
themselves through repair networks, communities and services.
Refurbish: improving and upgrading certain components of a product or building, to extend its life
and enhance its quality and value (common for computers, hotels, offices, aeroplanes, and trains).
Sometimes called reconditioning or retrofitting).
Remanufacture: using various parts and components of a discarded product in a new product with
the same function, thereby extending the life of its plastic components.
Repurpose: reusing discarded goods for another function thereby giving them a new life (e.g. plastic
sheetings become handbags, plastic bags become art installations, plastic bottles become lamps etc.).
Sometimes called upcycling.
Recycling: obtaining secondary raw materials from a post-consumer product. For plastics, this can be
done through mechanical, or chemical processes.
Energy recovery: recovering energy through incineration or anaerobic digestion (for biodegradable
plastics).
Re-mine: retrieving waste plastics by landfill mining.

Source: adapted from Reike, et al. 2018

Concerning recycling (R7), it is important to distinguish chemical from mechanical recycling
options. In mechanical recycling, plastics are converted into secondary raw material through
sorting, washing, grinding and regranulation processes (Ragaert et al., 2017). Mechanical
recycling is not perfectly efficient as a significant portion of plastics are lost in the process
(10-30% depending on the technology) (Picuno et al., 2021). Moreover, the resulting

127

5

Chapter 5

plastics are of lower quality than virgin materials as plastic compounds are degraded and
contaminated by the recycling process (Vollmer et al., 2020). Most mechanically recycled
plastics are therefore not considered food-grade material and can only be used in lowervalue applications such as ​shampoo bottles, flower pots and paint buckets (Picuno et al.,
2021). It is nonetheless the most widespread form of recycling as it is economically viable
for many different plastic types such as polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polypropylene
(PP), and polyethylene (PE) (Gradus, 2020).
Chemical recycling processes are relatively recent innovations by which large plastic
polymers can be broken down into smaller oligomers and monomers, that can be used as
building blocks for virgin plastics. This type of recycling is carried out through techniques
such as methanolysis, hydrolysis, solvolysis, glycolysis, and pyrolysis (Ragaert et al., 2017).
It typically involves heating polymers to high temperatures with different catalysts, such
as water or methanol(Vollmer et al., 2020). Chemical recycling can lead to higher-quality
and higher-value outputs than mechanical recycling yet, it is more energy-intensive than
chemical recycling and has yet to become economically viable on a large scale (Bucknall,
2020; Mah, 2021; Vollmer et al., 2020).

5

Overall, whether through mechanical or chemical processes, plastic recycling is complex
and has many physical limitations. In addition to the abovementioned challenges, the
presence of many different types of plastics in the same product (electronics can contain
over 14 different polymers) and the widespread use of additives (which are often toxic such
as brominated flame retardants) heavily complicates their recovery (Gradus et al., 2017;
Leslie et al., 2016; Ragaert et al., 2017). The heavy contamination of waste streams from
post-consumer plastic also greatly complicates the recovery process (Gradus, 2020; Simon,
2019; Vollmer et al., 2020). Recycling is thus never 100% efficient and higher value retention
options are therefore preferred from a sustainability standpoint as they increase the lifespan
of plastic products (R2-R6) or reduce the need to produce plastics in the first place (R0R2). In fact, research has found that re-usable packaging, such as returnable bottles, has
significantly lower ecological footprints than single-use plastics (Boesen et al., 2019; Coelho
et al., 2020; Greenwood et al., 2021).
The above review of the diversity of CE discourses and the key value-retention options for
plastics allows us to better understand the complexity of the topic. It thereby provides a
solid conceptual basis for the analysis of the discourses and policies regarding the transition
to a sustainable circular plastics economy in the Netherlands (sections 5.3) as well as to
develop relevant recommendations based on our findings (section 5.4).

128

Circular Plastics Economy in The Netherlands

5.2.2 Stage 2: Definition of the Concourse
In this step, all different positions and discourses are identified by gathering relevant
opinions, ideas, beliefs, and assumptions surrounding the study object. A mixture of media
(newspaper) analysis, stakeholder analysis, policy analysis and semi-structured expert
interviews were conducted to define the concourse. While analysing the concourse, we
uncovered that the overweighing majority of plastic waste in the Netherlands and the EU
emanates from packaging, this research will thus focus on the abovementioned sector
(PlasticEurope, 2020).
5.2.2.1 Media & Stakeholder Analysis
The LexisNexis database was used to gather Dutch newspaper articles on circular
economy and plastics. Using “plastic*” OR “kunststof*” AND “circulaire economie” OR
“kringloopeconomie” as keywords, led to 1212 newspaper articles published between
01-01-2010 and 17-12-2019. This sample was reduced to 183 news articles by selecting
the 8 national paid newspapers (Trouw, Financieele Dagblad, Nederlands Dagblad, NRC
Handelsblad, Volkskrant, Telegraaf, Reformatorisch Dagblad, and Algemeen Dagblad). All
articles that did not specifically talk about plastic policies or plastic waste management
were excluded, leading to a final selection of 42 articles (see supplementary materials A of
Calisto Friant et al. (2022a) for the full list of newspaper articles).
These 42 news articles were carefully reviewed and coded with Discourse Network Analyzer
2.0 to identify and categorise the organizations and actors they mentioned or quoted. This
method of stakeholder analysis is similar to the one used by Lazarevic and Valve (2017) who
identified actors engaging in the CE debate at the European level by reviewing articles in
the EurActiv and ENDS Europe news services. In addition to this, we identified organizations
from the Dutch Plastic Pact (Plastic Pact NL, 2021) and The National Agreement on the CE
(Government of Netherlands, 2017), two government initiatives aimed at promoting the CE
through multi-stakeholder agreements. This led to the identification of 211 organizations
which were divided into 7 broad actor groups (see Figure 5.3 and supplementary materials
B of Calisto Friant et al. (2022a) for the full list of identified stakeholders).
5.2.2.2 Policy Analysis
The authors reviewed 23 policies related to the transition to a sustainable circular plastics
economy from the EU, the Dutch government, and the producer responsibility organization
(Afvalfonds Verpakkingen) which represents all plastic packaging producers and importers
in the Netherlands to comply with the compulsory extended producer responsibility
legislation (see Table 5.2). Policies were analysed qualitatively to understand the CE
legislative framework and transition pathway for plastics in the Netherlands.

129

5

10003

Chapter 5

Government
agencies
Waste
management
companies
(recyclers and
collectors

Civil society
organisations

Plastic producer
organisations

Transition to a
circular plastics
economy

Research
institutes

Plastic applying
organisations /
brand owners

Consultancies

FIGURE 5.3 | Stakeholder groups involved in the transition to a circular plastics economy.

TABLE 5.2 | List of Analysed policy documents.

5

Year

Organization

Dutch document name

English document name

2003

Dutch Government

Landelijk Afvalbeheerplan 1

National Waste Management Plan 1

2007

Dutch Government

Landelijk Afvalbeheerplan 1

National Waste Management Plan 1
(2007 amendment)

2007

Dutch Government

Besluit Beheer Verpakkingen en
papier en karton

Packaging and Paper and Cardboard
Management Decree

2007

Dutch Government

Raamovereenkomst
Verpakkingen en zwerfafval

Framework Agreement
on Packaging and litter

2013

Dutch Government

Programma: Van afval naar grondstof Program: From waste to raw material

2014

Dutch Government

Raamovereenkomst Verpakkingen Framework Agreement on Packaging

2014

Afvalfonds Verpakkingen

Monitoringsrapportage 2014

Monitoring report 2014

2014

Dutch Government

Landelijk Afvalbeheerplan 2

National Waste Management Plan 2

2014

Dutch Government

Besluit Beheer Verpakkingen

Packaging Management Decree

2015

Afvalfonds Verpakkingen

Monitoringsrapportage 2015

Monitoring report 2015

2016

Dutch Government

Rijksbrede programma Nederland
Circulair in 2050

A circular economy in the
Netherlands by 2050

2016

Afvalfonds Verpakkingen

Monitoringsrapportage 2016

Monitoring report 2016

2017

Dutch Government

Grondstoffenakkoord

National agreement on the circular
economy

2017

Dutch Government

Transitie agenda Kunststoffen

Transition agenda circular economy
for plastics

2017

Afvalfonds Verpakkingen

Monitoringsrapportage 2017

Monitoring report 2017

2018

European Commission

A European Union Strategy for
plastics in a Circular Economy 2018

130

Circular Plastics Economy in The Netherlands

Year

Organization

Dutch document name

English document name

2018

European Commission

Directive 2018/851 on waste

2018

European Commission

Directive 2018/852 on packaging and
packaging waste

2018

Afvalfonds Verpakkingen

Monitoringsrapportage 2018

Monitoring report 2018

2019

Afvalfonds Verpakkingen

Monitoringsrapportage 2019

Monitoring report 2019

2019

European Commission

2019

Dutch Government

Plastic Pact NL

Plastic Pact NL

2019

Dutch Government

Landelijk Afvalbeheerplan`3

National Waste Management Plan 3

Directive 2019/904 on the reduction
of the impact of certain plastic
products on the environment

5.2.2.3 Semi-Structured Expert Interviews

Government

2

10003

Semi-structured interviews with professionals in the Dutch plastics sector were held to
explore their perspectives on the transition to a sustainable circular plastics economy in the
Netherlands. Interviewees were derived from the results of the stakeholder analysis as well
as through ‘snowball-sampling’43. The general objectives of the interviews were to identify
stakeholder opinions regarding the transition towards a sustainable CE for plastics in the
Netherlands, including their perspective on current public policies, business practices,
technologies, environmental issues and social implications (see supplementary materials
C of Calisto Friant et al. (2022a) with full interview questions). Interviews were conducted
online between March and April 2020. In total, 74 organisations were approached for an
interview of which 24 accepted the interview request (35.4% response-rate). To ensure
diversity and plurality of views and perspectives, interviews were sought with actors from
all 7 stakeholder groups (see Figure 5.4 and supplementary materials D of Calisto Friant et
al. (2022a) for further information on each interviewee).
3

Waste management companies

4

Bioplastic producers

11

1

7

Plastic producer organisations

3

Civil society organisations

2

9

4

Consultancies

4
5

Research institutes

2

Plastic applying organisations

3
Accepted
Declined
No response

2
3

0

5

3
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

No. of approached organisations

FIGURE 5.4 | Overview of interviews in each stakeholder group.
43 The Snowball-sampling method used in this study consisted in asking each interviewee to suggest other
participants based on their knowledge, expertise, and network in the field (Webler et al., 2009). Initial
interviewees were selected by contacting organizations found through the stakeholder analysis, with a key
focus to ensure diversity by approaching actors in each of the 7 identified actor groups.

131

5

Chapter 5

5.2.3 Stage 3: Establish Q-Sample
The Q-sample is the set of statements used as input for the Q-Survey. The Q-Sample is
obtained from the analysis of the concourse and must reflect the wide variety of opinions
and perspectives on the topic. In this research, each statement was formulated directly by
the authors following a careful investigation of the concourse and the diversity of different
actions and strategies that interviewees, policy documents and newspaper articles advocated
on the topic. Diversity was sought by incorporating a wide number of opposing and often
conflicting policy alternatives. Consistency was ensured by formulating each statement as a
direct policy action to be carried out by one or more clearly identified actor. A first set of 51
statements was established which was then refined by combining and regrouping similar
or closely related points. A final set of 42 statements was thereby developed for this research
(see Table 5.3). This number is consistent with Q-Method guidelines, which suggest that a
Q-Sample should have anywhere between 40 and 80 statements (Watts and Stenner, 2005).
After the final Q-sample was established, the survey was reviewed by 4 researchers from our
institution to ensure clarity and refine any ambiguities or potentially confusing statements.
Ease of use was also sought by pilot testing the final Q-sample in several online Q-method
survey platforms. This led to the choice of “Q-Methods Software” as the most user-friendly
platform for this Q-Survey.
TABLE 5.3 | Q statements for the transition to a sustainable circular plastics economy in the Netherlands
(Q-Sample).

5

#

Themes

Q statements

#1

Alternatives to plastic

The government and companies should investigate and promote
sustainable alternative materials to plastic.

#2 Ban export outside the EU

The EU should ban the export of plastic waste outside Europe so plastic
waste is recycled and processed within European borders.

#3

Benefits of plastics

The media should communicate the health and environmental
benefits of plastics better, especially compared to alternatives, which can
have a higher environmental footprint.

#4

Promote bio-based
plastics

The government and companies should encourage and highly
increase the use of bio-based plastics.

#5

Regulate bio-based
plastics

The government should highly regulate bio-based plastic to prevent that
they compete with food production and biodiversity conservation.

#6

Clean-up fund

The government and companies from the Global North should
establish a fund to finance clean-up activities of plastics in the
oceans and other natural ecosystems.

#7

Promote compostable
plastics

The government and companies should promote the use of
compostable plastics for applications where it is suitable (e.g. tea bags,
coffee capsules, cups, cutlery etc.).

#8

Consumer responsibility

Consumers should be responsible for the pollution of
plastics in the environment, not only companies.

#9

Ban controversial
fossil plastics

The government should ban plastics made from controversial
sources such as tar sands and shale gas.

132

Circular Plastics Economy in The Netherlands

#

Themes

Q statements

#10

Deposit return system

The government should mandate the establishment of a deposit
return systems for all relevant plastics (not just large PET bottles).

#11

Design for
sustainability

Companies should always design for recyclability and lower overall
environmental impacts throughout a product’s lifecycle (including
resource use and hazardous substances).

#12

Discourage incineration

The government should establish financial and legal incentives
to discourage the incineration of lower grade plastics (with or
without energy recovery) and promote their recycling.

#13

Education & awareness

All stakeholders should educate citizens and create more public awareness
and change the culture of mass consumption to reduce overall plastic use.

#14

Enforcement
and control

The government and companies should enforce stronger
control policies to prevent mismanaged plastics
(illegal dumping and exports to the Global South).

#15

Expand EPR to
other plastics

The government should expand EPR systems to other plastics
currently not covered by EPR schemes.

#16

Fair and just
societal system

The government should establish a fair and just societal system to make sure
that all the fees and costs of a circular economy transition for plastics do not
fall on the poorest and most vulnerable people.

#17

Global solidarity

Government and companies from the Global North should provide financial
assistance and technology transfers to countries in the Global South so they can
better manage plastic waste, as that is where most ocean plastics come from.

#18

Health, safety
and toxicity

Regulatory agencies should strengthen and improve the enforcement of
health, safety, and hazardous substances standards (OHS and REACH) on
plastic products, and their production process.

#19

EPR inclusiveness
and participation

Afvalfonds Verpakkingen should include civil society organisations and local and
national government representatives in a participatory and inclusive manner so
that its decisions regarding plastics are more democratic and collaborative.

#20

Increase EPR fees

Afvalfonds Verpakkingen should increase the waste management
contribution fee paid to the EPR system because the current price is too low
to foster the best recovery practices.

#21

Innovation fund

The government should establish a fund focused on innovation and R&D of
circular solutions (such as new sorting and recycling technologies) financed
by fees on virgin materials.

#22

Marketing
on recyclability

The government and companies should ensure that claims about
recyclability and composability are not misleading and deceptive.

#23

Municipal autonomy

Municipalities should have more autonomy in the management of their
recycling systems so that small-scale plastic recovery initiatives can be
created and develop disruptive innovations.

#24

Ban non-recyclable
plastics

The government should ban non-recyclable single-use plastic applications until
an effective collecting, sorting, and recycling infrastructure is implemented.

#25

Open-source
innovations

The government, companies, and civil society organisations should
promote open source technologies for plastic collection, sorting, and
recycling to expand innovations throughout society.

#26

Multi-stakeholder
participation and
collaboration

The government should increase civil society participation and multistakeholder cooperation along the entire value chain to improve plastic
policies and practices including eco-design, reuse, and recyclability.

133

5

Chapter 5

#

5

Themes

Q statements
The government and companies should ensure that all plastic products
and packaging have a material passport with the full list of materials
and their origin (including all the different polymers and additives)
so recyclers know how to process them.
The government should restrict the types of polymers and additives
allowed in the market so there are only a handful of plastic streams
that can be easily sorted and recycled.
The government and companies should ensure that all products contain
a health, environment, and social footprint label (which includes
information about the packaging), so consumers have full
information to make sustainable choices.

#27

Material passport

#28

Restrict polymer
types

#29

Product ecological
footprint

#30

Recycled content
requirements

The government should set high minimum requirements
for recycled plastic content in new plastic products.

#31

Recycling bins

The government should provide more recycling bins and
containers to people living in large cities, so they don’t
have to walk large distances to be able to recycle.

#32

Recycling targets

The government should increase plastic recycling targets.

#33

Less regulatory
constraints

The government should place less regulatory constraints for bio-based,
biodegradable, and recycled plastics, especially for food-uses.

#34

Renewable
energy sources

Companies should strive to use less energy as well as use only renewable
energy sources to produce, transport, and recycle plastics.

#35

Restrict sales in
Global South

Companies should not sell non-biodegradable single-use plastic
products in countries where the waste system cannot deal with plastic
waste (such as in many countries in the Global South).

#36

Promote reusable
packaging

The government and companies should highly
increase the use of reusable packaging.

#37

Short loops

Companies should keep plastic loops short and minimise transport
costs by using local products and materials as well as local
sorting, recycling, and production facilities.

#38

Employment and
social inclusion

The government should help people working in unsustainable sectors
of the plastic industry to re-locate to the circular plastic economy and
especially help the employment of people with poor job prospects.

#39

Taxes on plastic

The government should tax virgin fossil-based plastics and non-recyclable
plastics and reduce the taxes on recycled plastics.

#40

Transparency on
pledged commitments

Companies should publicly disclose data on their use of plastics including
information on plastic recycling and bioplastics, as well as data regarding the
progress on the achievement of pledged commitments such as the Plastic Pact.

#41 Unified municipal system

#42

Reduce virgin-plastic
consumption

The government should establish a single system for
waste management in all municipalities to generate efficient
economies of scale for plastic recovery operations.
The government should place targets to reduce
overall plastic consumption per capita.

Source: developed by authors from the analysis of the concourse.

134

Circular Plastics Economy in The Netherlands

5.2.4 Stage 4: Recruit participants (P-Set) and conduct Q-Survey

Government

32

4

Waste management companies

29

5

Plastic producer organisation

23

4

Civil society organisations

22

3

Consultancies

14

2

Research institutes

13

4

Plastic applying organisations

12

3

Not specified

10003

The P-set defines the participants which respond to the Q-survey. The selection of
the P-set is not carried out through a random process but is rather a carefully selected
sample of participants who are actively involved in the researched topic (Brown, 1980). A
successful Q-study necessitates anywhere from 15 to 60 participants (Gall and Rodwell,
2016). Moreover, there should always be fewer participants than Q-statements (Stevenson,
2015). What matters more than participant numbers is diversity and plurality in participant
perspectives (Webler et al., 2009). To ensure this diversity 145 participants were invited from
all 7 stakeholder groups identified in stage 1. In total, 26 participants answered the Q survey
(17.8% response rate), and each stakeholder group had at least 2 respondents, thereby
ensuring the plurality and diversity of views needed for a Q-study (see Figure 5.5).

Responded
Invited

1
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

FIGURE 5.5 | Invitations and responses to the Q survey per stakeholder group.

During the Q-survey participants were asked to rank all the 42 statements (Q-sample)
following this leading question: “How important do you consider the following action
statements in the transition to a sustainable circular plastics economy in the Netherlands?”.
To do so, participants had to place the statements on an 11-point quasi-normal distribution
ranging from “least important (-5)” to “neutral (0)” to “most important (+5)” (see Figure 5.6).
The nature of the quasi-normal distribution pyramid forced participants to make important
trade-offs between statements they considered similarly important or unimportant and, in
doing so, participants revealed their underlying opinions and points of view on the topic.
Each participant’s final set of submitted ranked statements constitutes his or her “Q-sort”
(the full Q-survey process and instructions can be seen in supplementary materials E of
Calisto Friant et al. (2022a)).

135

5

Chapter 5

FIGURE 5.6 | The ranking grid of the Q-sort process.

5.2.5 Stage 5: Statistical analysis and interpretation

5

The completed Q-sorts from all respondents constitute the main input for the factor
analysis. PQMethod software was used to analyse the data. This (free) software is specifically
developed for Q factor analysis and is widely used and recognised by researchers in the field
(Curry et al., 2013; Gram-Hanssen, 2019; Watts and Stenner, 2005; Webler et al., 2009; Zabala
et al., 2018). The factor analysis groups participants with similar Q-sorts into groups, which
reveal their common perspectives on the topic (Watts and Stenner, 2005; Webler et al., 2009).
Q-survey results were processed using the Centroid method and Varimax rotation, which
are widely used statistical tools to systematically uncover different participant discourses
through Q-methods (Barry and Proops, 1999; Stevenson, 2015; Watts and Stenner, 2005;
Webler et al., 2009).
The results of the factor analysis results were carefully examined and interpreted by
contrasting the perspective of each factor group with the typology of circularity discourses
developed by Calisto Friant et al. (2020). This allowed the mapping of the different factor
positions in the wider literature on the transition to a circular economy and society.

5.3

Results

Results are divided into 3 sub-sections. Section 5.3.1 summarises the relevant policies and
practices surrounding the transition towards a sustainable circular plastics economy in
the Netherlands as evidenced by the policy analysis, media analysis and expert interviews
(stage 2 of the methods). Section 5.3.2 analyses these findings in light of the conceptual
framework and its circularity discourse typology. Section 5.3.3 presents the statistical analysis
and interpretation of the Q-Survey results and describes the different resulting perspectives
regarding the transition to a sustainable circular plastics economy (stage 5 of the methods).

136

Circular Plastics Economy in The Netherlands

5.3.1 Results from the analysis of the concourse
As part of its CE Action Plan, the European Commission adopted the “European Union Strategy
for plastics in a Circular Economy” which addresses issues like recyclability, biodegradability,
the presence of hazardous substances in certain plastics, and marine litter (European
Commission, 2018). Several plastic specific Directives were implemented to address these
issues, such as Directive 2019/904 on the reduction of the impact of certain plastic products
on the environment, which banned several single-use plastic products such as cotton
buds, cutlery, stirrers, plates and straws and established eco-design and separate collection
requirements for single-use plastic bottles. Moreover, the EU set new recycling targets for
plastic packaging (50% by 2025 and 55% by 2030) (Directive 2018/852) and established the
obligation for the separate collection of municipal plastic waste (Directive 2018/851).
In addition to this, the EU has mandated the establishment of extended producer
responsibility (EPR) systems to manage plastic packaging waste (Directive 2018/852). An
EPR system is a policy mechanism by which the administrative, financial, and physically
responsibility to manage the entire life cycle of a product, and especially, the take-back,
recycling and final disposal, is given to the producers or importers of a product rather than
to the government (Lindhqvist, 2000).
Three key policies regulate plastic waste within the Netherlands, the “National Waste Plan”
established in 2003, as well as the “Packaging and Paper and Cardboard Management
Decree” and the “Framework Agreement on Packaging and Litter”, which were both
established in 2007. These policies set minimum plastic packaging recycling targets which
rose from 32% in 2009 to 38% in 2010, and further to 42% in 2012. They also created a
deposit system for large PET bottles and established the Dutch EPR system for packaging
waste. These policies were updated in 2014 to increase the minimum recycling targets from
43% in 2013 to 52% in 2022 (with an increase of 1% per year).
The producers and importers of plastic packaging founded Afvalfonds Verpakkingen to
collectively implement their obligations under the abovementioned policies (it is the socalled producer responsibility organization or PRO (Kalimo et al., 2015), which is responsible
for the implementation of the packaging EPR system in the Netherlands). Afvalfonds
Verpakkingen is financed by the packaging industry via a ‘waste management contribution
fee’. This fee must be paid by producing and importing organisations when they bring and/
or discard 50,000 (or more) kilos of packaging on the Dutch market, even if an organisation
is located outside the Netherlands.
The organisational and financing structure of Afvalfonds Verpakkingen and its recovery
activities is presented in Figure 5.7.

137

5

Chapter 5

European
Commission

Reports to
Reports
to
Implementation Agency

€

Conducts audits

Ministry of Infrastructure &
Water Management

Pay waste
contribution fee

Provide information

Reports to

Part of

(Rijkwaterstraat)
Conducts
audits

Producer
Responsibility
Organization
(Afvalfonds
Verpakkingen)

Waste management
and recycling firms

Market actor
State actor

Municipalities
r
fo
ion e
Provide
Conducts
at as t
s
n w
information
audits
pe of
om tion
c
ys ec
€
Pa coll
Monitoring & promotion
(Nedvang)
Financed with
waste
contribution fee

Litter prevention
(Nederland Schoon)

€

Knowledge development
(Kennis Instituut Duurzaam
Verpakken - KIDV)

Conduct
activities for
Afvalfonds

10003

Inspection of Living
Environment and Transport

Legend:

Producers and
Importers

Dutch
Parliament

Contracting collectors
& recyclers
(Verpakkingsketen BV - VPKT)

FIGURE 5.7 | EPR-system of packaging in the Netherlands (source: developed by authors based on
Afvalfonds Verpakkingen, 2018).

Each Dutch municipality organizes their waste collection system independently,
thereby resulting in a multiplicity of different collection systems. Afvalfonds Verpakkingen
compensates municipalities for their collection by paying a specific fee based on the
volume and quality of waste they collect. While this incentivises an efficient collection, it
also means that some municipalities which have poorly separated waste, don’t receive
enough compensation to cover their costs. In those cases, the costs for collection are not
fully covered by Afvalfonds Verpakkingen, but rather by local taxpayers (Gradus, 2020).

5

In 2016, the Dutch government established its national CE strategy “A circular economy in
the Netherlands by 2050”, where it set the ambition to reduce raw materials consumption
by 50% in 2030 and to become 100% circular by 2050 (Government of Netherlands, 2016).
This policy established plastics as one of the central components of the transition and seeks
that “in 2050, 100% renewable (recycled and biobased) plastics will be used without any
harmful impact on the environment, wherever such is technically feasible” (p. 51).
In the following years, the “National agreement on the circular economy (2017)”, the
“Transition agenda of plastics (2018)”, and the “Plastic Pact NL (2019)” were enacted as part
of this commitment. The above policies represent various multi-stakeholder agreements,
containing voluntary commitments from a wide variety of market, state, and civil society
actors (see supplementary materials B of Calisto Friant et al. (2022a) with a list of pact
members). They notably set several voluntary targets for 2025, such as ensuring that all
single-use plastic packaging is 100% recyclable; reducing plastic usage by 20% (in kg)
compared to 2017; reaching a 70% rate of plastic packaging recycling; ensuring that
new plastic packaging contains at least 35% recycled content and increasing the use of
sustainably produced biobased plastics (Plastic Pact NL, 2021).

138

Circular Plastics Economy in The Netherlands

In July 2019, a third “National Waste Management Plan” was implemented. It prohibited
landfilling and incineration without energy recovery for all sorts of plastic waste as well as
the export of plastic waste for landfilling or incineration.
10003

100%
90
80
70
60
51%

50 47%
40 43%

44%

50%
45%

52%
46%

51%
47%

54%
48%

57%

55%

50%

49%

30
22.5%

22.5%

20
10
0
2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

% Recycled (R7)

Target % recycling (R7) (EU Directive 2018/852)

% Energy recovery (R8)

Target % recycling (R7) (NL: Packaging Management Decree 2014)

2025

2030

FIGURE 5.8 | Results of recycling (R7) targets and energy recovery (R8) rates for plastic packaging of
between 2013 – 2019 (author’s work based on Afvalfonds Verpakkingen annual monitoring reports 2013 – 2019,
see supplementary materials F of Calisto Friant et al. (2022a) for full data).

The performance of the plastic recovery operations of Afvalfonds Verpakkingen can be seen
in Figure 5.8 (numbers in green represent recycling figures). It shows that the Dutch and
European recycling targets were largely achieved, and that recycling rates improved almost
every year except for 2017. According to Afvalfonds Verpakkingen, China’s ban on the import
of post-consumer plastic waste was a key factor explaining this setback (Annual monitoring
report of 2017, p. 5). In fact, there is insufficient recycling capacity in the country and Europe
as a whole44 (Gradus, 2020). Therefore, Afvalfonds Verpakkingen is highly dependent on the
export of its waste to third countries to fulfil its recycling targets and the Netherlands is thus
one of the leading exporters of plastic waste in the world (Brooks et al., 2018; C. Wang et al.,
2020). While data on the exact amount of Dutch plastics which are exported for recycling
are unavailable, studies have found that, in the EU, as much as 46% of plastics that are
destined for recycling are exported (Bishop et al., 2020).
The problem with this is that it is very hard to control what happens to plastic waste once
it is exported. Although exports of plastics are highly regulated under international law,
actual controls are rather weak, so it is virtually impossible to guarantee how plastic waste
will actually be processed and where it will end up45. In practice, plastic waste changes
44 Interview with Director of a consultancy firm on CE
45 Interview with Associate Director of a consultancy firm on CE and interview with Director of consultancy firm
in biotechnology

139

5

Chapter 5

hands multiple times along complex international trading routes, causing many leakages
to the environment along the way and often ending up in countries in the Global South
will little capacity to recycle it sustainably (Barnes, 2019). A large proportion of European
plastic waste which is reported as recycled thus ends up in landfills or in rivers and oceans
across the globe (Bishop et al., 2020). Even Afvalfonds Verpakkingen recognised, in their
2017 monitoring report, that “there is uncertainty about the quantities and actual recycling of
plastic packaging waste that has been exported to customers outside the EU” (p. 44). Moreover,
recent research has found that actual Dutch recycling figures for 2017 were closer to 23%
than the reported 51% (Brouwer et al., 2019; Picuno et al., 2021). According to Bishop et
al., the Netherlands is in fact, the 5th largest European contributor to ocean plastic debris
(in yearly kg of plastic debris per capita) (Bishop et al., 2020). Moreover, research suggests
that China’s ban will likely further increase the rate of mismanaged plastic as plastic waste
exports are now being channelled to other countries with lower capacities to process and
recycle plastic waste in a sustainable manner (Bishop et al., 2020).
It is also worth noting that there is little demand for recycled plastic in the Netherlands,
Europe and the world as a whole because of its higher price and lower quality compared
to virgin plastic46. As an interviewee mentioned, “99% of the producers choose virgin plastics
because it is cheaper and trustable. The quality is safer”47. This means that most recycled plastic
is not re-used in high-quality products and applications, and much of it ends up stockpiled
until it finds a buyer48. In fact, the actual use of recycled plastic in new plastic products is
only around 10% in the Netherlands (Verrips et al., 2019).

5.3.2 Analysis of Dutch Policies

5

From the above results, it is evident that current CE practices in the Netherlands are primarily
focused on eliminating landfilling and incineration and replacing it with energy recovery (R8)
and recycling (R7). While recovery figures are quite high compared to other countries (the
average rate of plastic packaging recycling in the EU was 41,4% in 2018), the Netherlands is
highly dependent on the export of plastic waste to obtain these results. The Dutch plastic
recovery system might thus lead to significant unintended socio-environmental impacts
throughout the world.
In addition to this, the Netherlands is still highly dependent on energy recovery (R8, see
Figure 5.8). While energy recovery can reduce C02 emissions by 30 to 45% compared to
traditional electricity generation with fossil fuels, it is not a clean process as it produces
significantly more greenhouse gases than recycling or re-using packaging (Vollmer et al.,
2020). Energy recovery also creates toxic residues that must ultimately be landfilled (about
1.5 to 2% of the net incinerated weight) (Picuno et al., 2021). Moreover, it fuels the need to
continuously produce more virgin plastic; thereby reproducing a linear system.
46 Interview with Professor in plastic packaging of Dutch University
47 Interview with Senior Policy Advisor of local governments
48 Interview with Business Development Manager of large recycling firm

140

Circular Plastics Economy in The Netherlands

The Plastic Pact NL has set targets that go beyond recycling and incineration, such
as consumption reduction (R0 refuse) and recycled content (R1 reduce) objectives.
However, those goals are purely voluntary; companies can therefore agree to those strong
commitments to be perceived as greener and more sustainable, without facing many
repercussions if they don’t reach them (Mah, 2021; Stafford and Jones, 2019; Verrips et al.,
2019). In fact, research shows that voluntary agreements and partnerships are often used
as key greenwashing strategies for corporations in the plastic sector to improve brand
reputation and reduce regulatory pressure (Mah, 2021).
The Dutch Government’s target to become 100% circular by 2050 is quite ambitious, yet it is
unclear how this will be measured and implemented. It could mean that all manufacturing
and recovery operations are delocalized to other countries, thereby exporting environmental
impacts from industrial activities, while still allowing for an increase in the consumption of
manufactured goods. This goal might therefore not guarantee that overall environmental
impacts will be reduced on a global scale. Furthermore, it is, in reality, impossible to create a
perfectly circular economy due to the second law of thermodynamics, which demonstrates
the inevitability of entropy as materials and energy are irreversibly dissipated in any physical
process (Korhonen et al., 2018a; Mayumi and Giampietro, 2019; Millar et al., 2019; Rammelt
and Crisp, 2014). This means that it is technically impossible to recycle plastics over and over
again as material quality degrades over time and a significant portion is lost in each recovery
cycle (Cullen, 2017; Genovese and Pansera, 2020; Giampietro and Funtowicz, 2020; Skene,
2018). The Dutch Government’s goal to achieve full circularity is thus more of a symbolic
objective than a realistic aim.
Moreover, the Dutch Government placed economic growth as a cornerstone of its CE
strategy, which is seen as bringing plenty of “opportunities for sustainable economic
growth” (p.42) and which relies heavily on an “absolute decoupling of economic growth
from environmental impact” (p. 10) (Government of Netherlands, 2016). This commitment
to green growth is clearly within the Technocentric Circular Economy perspective (see figure
5.2), and was chosen despite the fact that academic research has clearly evidenced that
absolute decoupling is not happening and will most likely never happen on a scale relevant
to significantly reduce current unsustainable patterns of resource use, greenhouse gas
emissions, and overall environmental degradation (Haberl et al., 2020; Hickel and Kallis,
2019; Jackson and Victor, 2019; Parrique et al., 2019).
All in all, the voluntary targets of the Plastic Pact and the 100% circularity objective of the
Dutch CE strategy seem to be less science-based goals than marketing stances which allow
these actors to be perceived as global leaders and front-runners in the CE transition. In
fact, these strong commitments appear rather ambitious and progressive, yet they are not
binding. Meanwhile, the policies which are actually compulsory in the Netherlands are doing
little to fundamentally transform the linear plastic production and consumption systems.

141

5

Chapter 5

Indeed recycling (R7) remains the core CE value retention strategy in Dutch policies and
the only one with mandatory targets. Yet, recycling has clear limitations and cannot by itself
lead to a sustainable circular plastic economy without strong policy measures and targets
on higher value retention options such as reducing virgin plastic consumption (R0 refuse),
eco-design requirements to reduce the environmental impact of plastics (R1 reduce), and
the promotion of re-usable packaging (R2 reuse)(Greenwood et al., 2021; Verrips et al., 2019;
Vollmer et al., 2020).
It is also important to note that Dutch policies do not include specific social justice
components. They thus don’t address key issues regarding who pays for the transition,
who controls CE technologies and how to support countries in the Global South, where a
substantial share of Dutch plastic waste currently ends up (Bishop et al., 2020). All in all, it is
clear from the above analysis, that the Dutch government’s approach to a CE transition for
plastics follows a Technocentric Circular Economy perspective (see Figure 5.2).

5.3.3 Analysis of Dutch societal discourse on the transition to a sustainable
circular plastics economy

5

This section represents stage 5 of the methodology, whereby participant Q-sorts were
analysed with the PQmethod software. This factor analysis led to the description of 4
different perspectives, which reflects 4 statistically significant discourses on the transition to
a CE for plastics in the Netherlands (see Figure 5.9). These 4 perspectives were analysed and
interpreted based on the Z-scores of their ranked statements (see supplementary materials
G of Calisto Friant et al. (2022a) with the full statistical output of the PQmethod software).
A Z-score is a standardized score on the statistical importance of each statement for each
perspective. Statements with a Z-score of larger than 1 demonstrate relative agreement and
smaller than -1 demonstrate relative disagreement. The analysis also looks at statistically
significant distinguishing statements for each perspective. These distinguishing statements
have z-scores which are significantly different between perspectives and therefore denote
key points of disagreement between the 4 discourses49.

49 Distinguishing statements are statistically significant at p < 0.05, and values indicated by an asterisk (*) have a
statistical significance at p < 0.01.

142

Approach to social, economic, environmental and governance considerations
Holistic

10003

Circular Plastics Economy in The Netherlands

Segmented

Optimist

Perspective 2:

Focus on new technologies
and innovations

Perspective 4:

Promotion of bio-plastic
alternatives

Sceptical

Technological innovation
and ecological collapse

Perspective 3:

Strengthen current market-based
policy approach

Perspective 1:

Promote reusability and
global solidarity

FIGURE 5.9 | 4 perspectives resulting from factor analysis and the circularity discourse type.

5.3.3.1 Perspective 1: Promote reusability and global solidarity
This perspective was represented by people from civil society organisations, government
agencies, and research institutes. Figure 5.10 shows the Z-scores of this perspective and
Table 5.4 shows the statistically significant distinguishing statements between perspective
1 and all other perspectives. The data demonstrates that this perspective seeks strong
policy actions to reduce plastic consumption with a high support for statements such as
promoting reusable packaging, banning non-recyclable plastics (#36), reducing the overall
use of plastics per capita (#42), and expanding deposit return systems (#10).
Moreover, this perspective seeks to increase the use of recycled plastic in new products
by taxing virgin fossil-based plastics and non-recyclable plastics (#39), designing for
sustainability and recyclability (#11), discouraging incineration (#12), and setting high
minimum requirements for recycled plastic content in new plastic products (#30).
This perspective also has a rather strong commitment to global solidarity as it is in favour
of banning of export of plastic waste outside the EU (#2), and providing financial assistance
and technology transfers to countries in the Global South so they can better manage plastic
waste (#17).
Moreover, this perspective is strongly opposed to reducing state control as it is strongly
opposed to statements favouring less regulatory constraints for bio-based, biodegradable,
recycled plastics (#33), and increasing consumer responsibility (#8).
Overall considering the emphasis of this perspective on social change towards reusable
packaging and reduced plastic consumption and its support for global solidarity, this
perspective is most aligned with the Transformational Circular Society discourse type (Calisto
Friant et al., 2020).

143

5

10003

Chapter 5

Promote reusable packaging (#36)

2.101

Deposit return system (#10)

1.566

Ban export outside the EU (#2)

1.334

Taxes on plastic (#39)

1.326

Design for sustainability (#11)

1.272

Discourage incineration (#12)

1.157

Recycled content requirements (#30)

Product ecological footprint (#29)

–1.169

Health. safety and toxicity (#18)

–1.470

Promote compostable plastics (#7)

–1.531

Benefits of plastics (#3)

–1.669

Less regulatory constraints (#33)

–1.833

Consumer responsibility (#8)
Short loops (#37)

–2.101
–2.0

1.093

–1.163

–1.5

–1.0

–0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

FIGURE 5.10 | Perspective 1: most (green) and least (red) important Q statements with Z-score < -1 and > 1.

TABLE 5.4 |Significant distinguishing statements of perspective 1 at p < 0.05 and marked with ‘*’ at p < 0.01.

5

Perspective 1

Perspective 2

Perspective 3

Perspective 4

#

Q statements

Z-score

Z-score

Z-score

Z-score

#36

Promote reusable packaging

2.10*

-0.97

0.54

-0.90

#10

Deposit return system

1.57*

-0.65

0.48

-1.19

#24

Ban non-recyclable plastics

0.90*

-1.10

-0.03

-0.81

#17

Global solidarity

0.85*

-0.60

-1.04

-0.72

#42 Reduce virgin plastic consumption

0.65*

-1.58

-1.36

-1.38

#5

Regulate bio-based plastics

-0.43*

0.59

0.79

-1.76

#7

Promote compostable plastics

-1.47

-0.66

-0.02

1.95

#3

Benefits of plastics

-1.53*

1.38

0.95

-0.19

#33

Less regulatory constraints

-1.67

-0.79

-1.02

1.33

#8

Consumer responsibility

-1.83*

0.85

0.92

-0.10

#37

Short loops

-2.10

-0.54

-0.65

-1.09

5.3.3.2 Perspective 2: Focus on new technologies and innovations
This perspective was represented by people from the business sector such as plastic-applying
organisations, plastic producing organisations, and waste management companies. From
Figure 5.11 and Table 5.5, it is clear that this perspective is highly focused on improving
recycling rates with policies such as creating a single system for waste management in all
municipalities to generate efficient economies of scale for plastic recovery operations (#41),
discouraging incineration (#12), design for sustainability and recyclability (#11), marketing
on recyclability (#22), expanding EPR to other plastics (#15), and improving enforcement
and control (#14).

144

10003

Circular Plastics Economy in The Netherlands

2.022

Unified municipal system (#41)
Discourage incineration (#12)

1.834

Design for sustainability (#11)

1.487
1.382

Benefits of plastics (#3)
Marketing on recyclability (#22)

1.345

Expand EPR to other plastics (#15)

1.133

Innovation fund (#21)

1.126

Enforcement and control (#14)

Ban non-recyclable plastics (#24)

–1.097

Restrict polymer types (#28)

–1.243

Reduce virgin-plastic consumption (#42)

–1.583

Ban controversial fossil plastics (9)

–1.744

Material passport (#27)

–2.029
–2.0

1.002

–1.5

–1.0

–0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

FIGURE 5.11 |Perspective 2: most (green) and least (red) important Q statements with Z-score < -1 and > 1.

TABLE 5.5 | Significant distinguishing statements of perspective 2 at p < 0.05 and marked with ‘*’ at p < 0.0.
#

Q statements

Perspective 1

Perspective 2

Perspective 3

Perspective 4

Z-score

Z-score

Z-score

Z-score

#41

Unified municipal system

0.20

2.02*

0.17

0.34

#25

Open-source innovations

-0.44

0.87

-0.27

-0.15

#39

Taxes on plastic

1.33

0.49

2.27

1.71

#38

Employment and social inclusion

-0.72

0.42

-1.26

-0.52

#35

Restrict sales in Global South

0.81

-0.65

-1.27

0.95

#7

Promote compostable plastics

-1.47

-0.66

-0.02

1.95

#30

Recycled content requirements

1.09

-0.94*

1.46

1.47

#9

Ban controversial fossil plastics

-0.09

-1.74*

-0.60

-0.28

#27

Material passport

0.39

-2.03*

0.39

0.05

This perspective is also focused on developing new technologies and innovations with
policy actions such as promoting open-source technologies (#25) and establishing a fund
focused on innovation and R&D of circular solutions (#21).
Moreover, this perspective is highly opposed to strong government actions such as bans
on non-recyclable plastics (#24), bans on plastics made from controversial sources such as
tar sands and shale gas (#9), and restrictions on polymer types allowed in the market (#28).
In addition to this, this perspective finds it is highly important for the media to better
communicate the health and environmental benefits of plastics (#3).
Overall, the above statements demonstrate a high level of optimism regarding technological
change and recycling innovations. It also shows a larger focus on market-based solutions
such as EPR schemes, eco-design, and product marketing rather than strong government
actions such as bans and restrictions. Moreover, this perspective did not give high
145

5

Chapter 5

importance to any social policies, thereby demonstrating a segmented view on the topic.
This perspective thus clearly falls within the Technocentric Circular Economy discourse type
(Calisto Friant et al., 2020).
5.3.3.3 Perspective 3: Strengthen current market-based policy approach
This perspective is represented by a wide range of people from government institutions,
plastic applying organisations, consultancies, civil society organisations, and waste
management companies.

10003

By analysing results in Figure 5.12 and Table 5.6, it is clear that this perspective is mostly
characterized by the statements it is opposed to rather than those it found important. It is
thus opposed to transformational social justice policies such as creating a fair system where
the costs of a circular economy transition for plastics do not fall on the poorest and most
vulnerable people (#16), improving the participation of civil society organizations in the
EPR system (#19), restricting the sale of non-compostable plastics in the Global South (#35),
helping the employment and inclusion of workers from the linear plastic and fossil-fuel
industry towards a circular plastic economy (#38), and establishing a fund to clean plastics
in the oceans and other natural ecosystems (#6).
Taxes on plastic (#39)

2.275

Design for sustainability (#11)

1.840

Recycling targets (#32)

1.480

Recycled content requirements (#30)

1.455

Expand EPR to other plastics (#15)

5

Recycling bins (#31)

–1.024

Less regulatory constraints (#33)

–1.032

Clean-up fund (#6)

–1.038

Global solidarity (#17)

–1.257

Promote bio-based plastics (#4)

–1.259

Employment and social inclusion (#38)

–1.268

Restrict sales in Global South (#35)

–1.271

EPR inclusiveness and participation (#19)
Reduce virgin-plastic consumption (#42)

–1.362

Fair and just societal system (#16)

–1.698
–2.019
–2.0

–1.5

1.099

–1.013

–1.0

–0.5

Municipal autonomy (#23)
0.0
0.5
1.0

1.5

2.0

FIGURE 5.12 | Perspective 3: most (green) and least (red) important Q statements with Z-score < -1 and > 1.

This perspective also finds the improvement of the current recycling systems rather important
with policies such as increasing recycled content requirements (#30), and rising recycling
targets (#32). Yet this perspective is opposed to more transformational policy actions such
as restricting polymer types in the market (#28), reducing virgin plastic consumption (#42)
and greater municipal autonomy to develop small-scale disruptive innovations (#23).

146

Circular Plastics Economy in The Netherlands

All in all, considering the abovementioned results, which don’t place any social justice
policies as important, and heavily focus on bioplastics as a technologically innovative
alternative to fossil plastics, it is clear that perspective 4 falls within the Technocentric Circular
Economy discourse type (Calisto Friant et al., 2020).
TABLE 5.6 | Significant distinguishing statements of perspective 3 at p < 0.05 and marked with ‘*’ at p < 0.01.
Perspective 1

Perspective 2

Perspective 3

Perspective 4

#

Q statements

Z-score

Z-score

Z-score

Z-score

#28

Restrict polymer types

-0.57

-1.24

0.88*

-1.90

#20

Increase EPR fees

-0.37

-0.67

0.56

-0.38

#36

Promote reusable packaging

2.10

-0.97

0.54*

-0.90

#29

Product ecological footprint

-1.16

-0.62

0.48*

-1.05
-1.19

#10

Deposit return system

1.57

-0.65

0.48*

#7

Promote compostable plastics

-1.47

-0.66

-0.02

1.95

#24

Ban non-recyclable plastics

0.90

-1.10

-0.03

-0.81

#35

Restrict sales in Global South

0.81

-0.65

-1.27

0.95

#19 EPR inclusiveness and participation

-0.36

0.24

-1.27*

-0.05

#16

0.17

0.69

-1.70*

0.67

Fair and just societal system

5.3.3.4 Perspective 4: Promotion of bio-plastic alternatives

10003

This perspective was represented by people from waste management companies, research
institutes, and plastic-producing organisations. Looking at results from Figure 5.13 and Table
5.7 demonstrates that this perspective is heavily focused on policies supporting bio-plastics
with statements such as promoting the use of compostable plastics (#7), increasing taxes on
virgin fossil-based plastics and non-recyclable plastics (#39), encouraging and increasing the
use of bio-based plastics (#4), reducing regulatory constraints for bio-based, biodegradable,
and recycled plastics, especially for food-uses (#33), and promoting sustainable alternative
materials to plastics (#1). Moreover, this perspective is opposed to regulating bio-based
plastics so they don’t compete with food production and biodiversity conservation (#5).
Promote compostable plastics (#7)
Taxes on plastic (#39)
Promote bio-based plastics (#4)
Recycled content requirements (#30)
Recycling targets (#32)
Less regulatory constraints (#33)
–1.046
–1.095
–1.187
–1.236
–1.382
–1.523
–1.761
–1.903
–2.0
–1.5

–1.0

–0.5

1.951
1.713
1.572
1.474
1.426
1.333
Product ecological footprint (#29)
Short loops (#37)
Deposit return system (#10)
Renewable energy sources (#34)

Reduce virgin-plastic consumption (#42)
Municipal autonomy (#23)
Regulate bio-based plastics (#5)
Restrict polymer types (#28)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5

2.0

FIGURE 5.13 | Perspective 4: most (green) and least (red) important Q statements with Z-score < -1 and >1.

147

5

Chapter 5
TABLE 5.7 | Significant distinguishing statements of perspective 4 at p < 0.05 and marked with ‘*’ at p < 0.01.
#

Q statements

Perspective 1

Perspective 2

Perspective 3

Perspective 4

Z-score

Z-score

Z-score

Z-score

#7

Promote compostable plastics

-1.47

-0.66

-0.02

1.95*

#4

Promote bio-based plastics

-0.59

-0.81

-1.26

1.57*

#33

Less regulatory constraints

-1.67

-0.79

-1.02

1.33*

#1

Alternatives to plastic

-0.41

-0.37

-0.09

0.95*

#8

Consumer responsibility

-1.83

0.85

0.92

-0.10

#3

Benefits of plastics

-1.53

1.38

0.95

-0.19*

#15

Expand EPR to other plastics

0.68

1.13

1.10

-0.76*

#5

Regulate bio-based plastics

-0.43

0.59

0.79

-1.76*

This perspective also finds the improvement of the current recycling systems rather important
with policies such as increasing recycled content requirements (#30), and rising recycling
targets (#32). Yet this perspective is opposed to more transformational policy actions such
as restricting polymer types in the market (#28), reducing virgin plastic consumption (#42)
and greater municipal autonomy to develop small-scale disruptive innovations (#23).
All in all, considering the abovementioned results, which don’t place any social justice
policies as important, and heavily focus on bioplastics as a technologically innovative
alternative to fossil plastics, it is clear that perspective 4 falls within the Technocentric Circular
Economy discourse type (Calisto Friant et al., 2020).

5

5.4

Discussion

This section discusses the implications of the results and proposes recommendations for the
transition to a sustainable circular plastics economy. It also discusses the limitations of this research.

5.4.1 The plastic discourse in the Netherlands
Results from the policy analysis found that the Dutch government followed a Technocentric
Circular Economy approach to a CE transition in the plastics sector. Results from the factor
analysis found that perspectives two, three, and four also follow a Technocentric Circular
Economy discourse, while only one perspective followed a Transformational Circular Society
discourse. These results indicate that both Dutch societal perspectives and public policies
are dominated by Technocentric Circular Economy discourses. This is in line with results from
Palm et al. (2021) who found that the most dominant plastic narratives in government and
industry sectors in Europe also fall within the Technocentric Circular Economy discourse type.
Plastic governance in the Netherlands is thus not geared towards social justice or reduced
plastic consumption and ecological footprints. Instead, it focuses on recycling solutions,

148

Circular Plastics Economy in The Netherlands

whereby people are brought to believe that they can continue consuming more plastic as
long as they throw it in the right bin. It thereby obscures the complex technological and
logistical challenges of recycling and its impacts on people and ecosystems throughout
the world by creating an illusion of perfect circularity, which incentivises further plastic
consumption (Barnes, 2019; Giampietro and Funtowicz, 2020; Valenzuela and Böhm, 2017).
To understand why this is the dominant framing of the plastic problem, it is important
to acknowledge that the Netherlands is a key player in the global plastic industry with
hundreds of producing firms in the sector generating a turnover of 17.5 billion euros (2%
of Dutch GDP) in 2014 and exporting 83% of their production (Grin, 2018). The powerful oil
sector has also strongly pushed for an increased production of plastics as the biggest future
use of fossil-fuels, now that their use as energy sources must be reduced to comply with
climate change commitments.(Bauer and Fontenit, 2021; Mah, 2021) There are thus strong
lock-ins that tie the economic and geopolitical interests of the Netherlands with the plastic
industry and thereby incentivise discourses and policies that don’t threaten its position as
one of the top plastic producers and exporters in the world(Bauer and Fontenit, 2021).
Another way to explain the dominance of Technocentric Circular Economy perspectives in
the Netherlands is by acknowledging the role of highly processed foods, and the delivery
industry in fostering the dependency on plastic packaging. E-commerce has greatly
increased the demand for plastic packaging from the delivery industry, in particular for online
food delivery services (Arunan and Crawford, 2021; Su et al., 2020). The rising consumption
of ultra-processed foods also contributes to an increased dependence on plastic packaging
(Fardet and Rock, 2020). Plastic packaging consumption in the Netherlands has thus risen
by 11.75% from 2013 to 2019 (see supplementary materials of Calisto Friant et al. (2022a) F
for full data). The continuous growth and convenience of plastic packaging thereby limits
the possibility of imagining a reduction in its consumption, through re-fuse (R-0), re-deuce
(R0), and re-use (R2) alternatives; and instead, biases current discourses and policies towards
improved collection, recycling (R7) and recovery (R8) strategies.

5.4.2 Policy recommendations
The results from the factor analysis also allow us to see which statements are considered
most important by all four perspectives (see Table 5.8). This can evidence points of
consensus for certain policies, which might be quickly implemented as low-hanging fruits
for the transition to a sustainable circular plastics economy in the Netherlands.

149

5

Chapter 5
TABLE 5.8 | Q-statements with the highest Z-Scores across all 4 perspectives.
#

5

Persp. 1

Persp. 2

Persp. 3

Persp. 4

SUM

#39 Taxes on plastic

Q-Statement

1.326

0.492

2.275

1.713

1.452

#11 Design for sustainability

1.272

1.487

1.840

0.905

1.376

#12 Discourage incineration

1.157

1.834

0.760

0.569

1.080

#32 Recycling targets

0.636

0.390

1.480

1.426

0,983

#2 Ban export outside the EU

1.334

0.454

0.810

0.715

0.828

#30 Recycled content requirements

1.093

−0.943

1.455

1.474

0.770

#41 Unified municipal system

0.203

2.002

0.174

0.336

0.679

#22 Marketing on recyclability

0.110

1.345

0.840

0.380

0.669

#15 Expand EPR to other plastics

0.678

1.133

1.099

−0.764

0.537

#21 Innovation fund

0.355

1.126

−0.019

0.569

0.508

Short-term policy recommendations, with strong support across societal stakeholders:
1. Tax virgin fossil-based plastics and non-recyclable plastics and reduce the taxes on recycled
plastics (statement #39). The price of virgin plastics remains too low for recycling to be
an economically competitive alternative (Cramer, 2018; Forrest et al., 2019). Taxes can
thus make virgin fossil-based plastics and non-recyclable plastics more expensive and
thereby stimulate the production and uptake of recycled plastics (Barrowclough and
Birkbeck, 2020; Verrips et al., 2019).
2. Establish a fund focused on innovation and R&D of circular solutions (such as new
sorting and recycling technologies) financed by fees on virgin materials (statement
#21). Resources are still needed to improve the cost-effectiveness, eco-efficiency,
and commercial readiness of new technologies (Cramer, 2018; Ragaert et al., 2017).
A fund could thus provide much-needed financial resources while also reducing the
competitiveness of unsustainable virgin materials (Barrowclough and Birkbeck, 2020;
Verrips et al., 2019).
3. Establish financial and legal incentives to discourage the incineration of lower-grade
plastics (with or without energy recovery) and promote their recycling (statement
#12). In the Netherlands, the costs of recycling outweigh those of energy recovery by
as much as 36,7% (Gradus et al., 2017). Financial and legal incentives with key targets to
reduce energy recovery could thus help make recycling a more cost-effective solution.
4. Design for recyclability and lower overall environmental impacts throughout a
product’s lifecycle (including resource use and hazardous substances) (statement
#11). Plastic products currently contain a large number of different polymer types and
additives, which provide specific textures, colours, and properties, but that heavily
reduce recyclability (Simon, 2019). Moreover, there is no evidence showing that EPR
systems lead to changes in the eco-design of products to make them more easily
recyclable or longer-lasting (Campbell-Johnston et al., 2020a; Deutz, 2009; Kunz et al.,
2018; Maitre-Ekern, 2021; Micheaux and Aggeri, 2021). To improve recycling potential
and reduce the overall environmental impact of plastic packaging, it is thus key to
150

Circular Plastics Economy in The Netherlands

5.

6.

7.

establish direct eco-design regulations that limit the number of additives, multilayer
and composite plastic materials and support the use of sustainable alternatives
(Gradus, 2020; Mah, 2021). The eco-modulation of EPR fees is a key manner to achieve
this objective, whereby producers pay EPR fees based on the environmental impact
and recyclability of their product, thereby directly incentivising eco-design innovations
(Campbell-Johnston et al., 2021; Kunz et al., 2018; Picuno et al., 2021; Vermeulen et al.,
2021; Watkins et al., 2017).
Increasing plastic recycling targets (statement #32). The Plastic Pact NL voluntary
commitment to reach a 70% recycling rate by 2025 could become a mandatory target
to stimulate the industry and reduce the risks of free-riders.
Set minimum requirements for recycled plastic content in new plastic products (statement
#30). The current use of recycled plastic in new products is only about 10% in the
Netherlands (Verrips et al., 2019) it is thus key to set new mandatory targets which help
create new market avenues for recycled plastics.
Ban the export of plastic waste outside Europe so plastic waste is recycled and
processed within European borders (statement #2). This policy is key to ensure that
plastics are properly recycled and don’t end up causing more harm to human health
and ecosystems (Barnes, 2019; Bishop et al., 2020). Not only will this stimulate the
recycling industry in the EU, but it will also allow countries in the Global South to focus
the little recycling capacity they have on their own plastic waste.

While they are important, the above policies alone are not enough to create a fair and
inclusive transition towards a sustainable circular plastics economy. Other key policies,
which might not have the strongest support, are thus necessary, especially considering the
recommendations of previous research in the area.
Policy recommendations, which are important from a sustainability and circularity perspective:
1. Afvalfonds Verpakkingen should include civil society organisations and local and
national government representatives in a participatory and inclusive manner so that its
decisions regarding plastics are more democratic, transparent and inclusive (statement
#26). Evidence from this and other research shows that EPR systems tend to choose
the cheapest and most profitable recovery option rather than the most social and
environmentally sustainable options (Campbell-Johnston et al., 2020a; Kalimo et al.,
2015; Steenmans, 2019). This is why most of the waste in the Netherlands is currently
incinerated or exported to the Global South. While EPR costs are born by society, which
pays the EPR fee and suffers the consequences of plastic pollution and incineration,
people currently have no say on how EPRs are managed. It is therefore key to increase
the democratic inclusiveness of the system by placing civil society organizations and
local government representatives in the board of Afvalfonds Verpakkingen, with an
equal say in decisions compared to private actors. The EPR system would thus not
only become more inclusive but will also create full transparency and accountability

151

5

Chapter 5

2.

3.

4.

5

5.

regarding what happens to collected plastics. This can thus lead to key improvements
in the social and environmental performance of the EPR system (Campbell-Johnston
et al., 2021, 2020a; Kalimo et al., 2015; Micheaux and Aggeri, 2021).
Establish targets to reduce overall plastic consumption per capita (statement #42). Reducing
overall plastic consumption is the ultimate aim of any CE policy for plastics according
to academics and practitioners alike (Barnes, 2019; Ghisellini et al., 2016; Palm et al.,
2021; WEF et al., 2016). It is thus key to focus on this goal as a binding policy target.
The government and companies should highly increase the use of reusable packaging
(statement #36). Reusable packaging has been in a steady decline in the last
decades(Coelho et al., 2020). Yet, it has a unique potential as it can lead to both
economic savings and environmental impact reductions compared to singleuse options. Studies have found that reusable packaging outperforms single-use
packaging for both business-to-business and business-to-consumer applications
(Boesen et al., 2019; Coelho et al., 2020; Greenwood et al., 2021). Moreover, reusable
packaging enjoys renewed customer acceptance (Greenwood et al., 2021). To facilitate
the deployment of reusable packaging options, the state can establish deposit-refund
systems and reduce taxes for reusable packaging (Verrips et al., 2019). In addition to
this, an eco-efficient and customer-friendly design of standardised reusable packaging
containers, bottles, crates, and logistical systems should be established to improve the
economic and environmental efficiency of return systems.
The government should establish a fair and just societal system to make sure that all
the fees and costs of a circular economy transition for plastics do not fall on the poorest
and most vulnerable people (statement #16). The EPR fees and the additional taxes
which are suggested as policy options above will increase the overall price of products
for consumers in a regressive manner (those that have the least will pay the most as a
percentage of their income) (Maitre-Ekern, 2021; Verrips et al., 2019). To compensate
for this, it is key to redistribute some of these resources to low-income communities
through projects and initiatives that employ vulnerable and disenfranchised groups
and support local livelihoods (Barrowclough and Birkbeck, 2020). Pay-as-you-throw
systems, which reward people for recycling could also be established to redistribute
part of the collected taxes and fees (Kunz et al., 2018).
Government and companies from the Global North should provide financial assistance
and technology transfers to countries in the Global South so they can better manage
plastic waste (statement #17). Waste management infrastructure and technology is
very expensive, in low-income countries it can be the single highest budget item for
municipal governments (Bishop et al., 2020). Yet these countries must deal with many
other key sustainability issues from poverty to climate change and lack of housing
(Calisto Friant, 2019). Therefore, they require significant amounts of financial and
technical assistance to help them develop their waste management infrastructure
(Barnes, 2019; Barrowclough and Birkbeck, 2020). Fostering open-source technologies

152

Circular Plastics Economy in The Netherlands

6.

7.

can also help in this regard as they can spread circular innovations and solutions
throughout the world and democratize the transition to a circular economy and
society (Genovese and Pansera, 2020).
The government and companies from the Global North should establish a fund to
finance clean-up activities of plastics in the oceans and other natural ecosystems
(statement #6). Plastic pollution is ultimately a “collective action problem”, which
requires global action to succeed (Vince and Hardesty, 2018). Those that produce and
consume the most plastics and have the greatest financial capacity should thus take
the lead in solving this problem by funding clean-up activities throughout the world
(Barnes, 2019; Clift et al., 2019; Fadeeva and Van Berkel, 2021; Verrips et al., 2019).
Educate citizens and create more public awareness and change the culture of mass
consumption to reduce overall plastic use (statement #13). In many ways, plastics
themselves are not the problem, they are durable, efficient, and infinitely adaptable
materials (Bucknall, 2020). Rather, the problem resides in the high-paced capitalist
system of mass consumption and production that depends on cheap throwaway
plastics. The question is thus not only how to better recover and reuse plastics but
rather how to use less of everything (Nielsen et al., 2020). Sustainability education and
awareness-raising should not focus on individual consumer choices and behaviours,
which have very limited environmental impacts (Evans et al., 2020). Instead, it should
focus on “questioning our over-consumptive consumerist lifestyles” (Stafford and Jones,
2019) and “challenging entrenched corporate and societal views about growth” (Mah,
2021). It is indeed key to promote post-materialist worldviews, which not only reduce
the demand for unnecessary consumption but also open the door to slower, healthier
and more convivial ways of life (D’Alisa et al., 2014; Hickel, 2020b; Latouche, 2009).

The above policy recommendations should be understood as a set of integrated policies,
which complement each other. Plastic poses complex problems, which cannot be
addressed through siloed actions or single strategies. A combination of value retention
options from refuse (R0) to remine (R9) are thus needed, along with strong social justice and
global solidarity policies. While these recommendations are specifically formulated for the
Dutch policy context, they might also bring insights and ideas for the transition to a circular
economy in other countries and contexts.

5.4.3 Limitations and future research
The first limitation of this research is the long and complex Q-survey process, which
participants sometimes find difficult and overwhelming, thereby explaining the low
participation rate (17.8%). This is a known implication of using Q-Methods, and it is an
integral part of this methodology, as the long and complex ranking of statements forces
each participant to make key choices that reveal their underlying discourse on the topic
(Webler et al., 2009). The various pilot tests of our questionnaire in several online Q-method
survey platforms helped us choose the most user-friendly option and limit this barrier to

153

5

Chapter 5

participation. However, future research should look at ways to further reduce the complexity
of the Q-sorting process, both online and in-person.
Another key limitation of the methods is that the statements of the Q-survey were created
from the results of the interviews and the policy and media analysis. They, therefore, replicate
hegemonic visions on the CE transition for plastics, meaning that more alternative and
radical propositions might not be adequately addressed and represented in the Q-survey.
The following policies were therefore missing from the analysis as they were not present in
the analysed concourse, yet they might be important elements of the transition:
•
•
•

Banning unnecessary plastic uses such as potable water bottles and additives in
cosmetics and personal health products (Clift et al., 2019; Verrips et al., 2019).
Supporting local farmer markets and shops rather than supermarkets and online
stores, which have more processed and/or packaged goods(Fardet and Rock, 2020).
Establishing marine protected areas and banning bottom trawling and other harmful
industrial fishing activities which devastate ocean biodiversity and are a key source of
plastic pollution (Fadeeva and Van Berkel, 2021; Nielsen et al., 2020; Stafford and Jones,
2019).

Future research should further analyse these and other policy options and approaches to
addressing the CE transition for plastics.

5

Another key limitation lies in the very object of the study. Some authors have argued
that the recent focus on the plastic pollution problem is a distraction from more urgent
and important challenges of climate change and biodiversity conservation (Nielsen et al.,
2020; Stafford and Jones, 2019). The art of policymaking can be understood as “creating
problems that institutions can handle”(Palm et al., 2021), and, in that regard, the plastic
pollution problem can be seen as a perfect opportunity to employ a neoliberal discourse
of technocentric, market-based solutions, whereby corporations can resolve the plastic
problem with their recycling innovations (Mah, 2021). Results from this research suggest
that this technocentric discourse represents a dominant framing of the problem in the
Netherlands. Future research in this regard is necessary, especially research that goes beyond
a purely technical approach to plastics and looks at the manyfold social and ecological
implications of cheap throwaway plastics within a global system of mass consumption
and production. Indeed, plastics themselves are hardly the problem; it is rather how they
are used by the current socio-technical system which is the problem(Mah, 2021). Plastics
are merely a cheap, lightweight, and flexible material, yet this system has used them as a
throwaway vehicle that replicates a high-speed cycle of endless mass consumption. This
systemic perspective on the topic must be further researched and understood, not only
because we cannot grow forever on a finite planet but also because research has shown that
human beings aspire for infinitely more meaningful and convivial lives than the productivist
materialism on which capitalism depends (Hickel, 2020b; Jackson, 2016; Latouche, 2009).

154

Circular Plastics Economy in The Netherlands

5.5

Conclusions

This research has found that Dutch policies and discourses on plastics mainly follow a
Technocentric Circular Economy perspective, which places high hopes on technological
innovations such as chemical and mechanical recycling technologies and pays little
attention to reducing global socio-ecological impacts. In the short term, this strategy might
make the Netherlands appear as a frontrunner in the transition to a CE and thereby bring
unprecedented growth to its plastic recovery industry. Yet, considering the many limitations
of recycling technologies, it is highly unlikely that such a strategy will effectively reduce the
human and environmental health impact of plastics. Instead, higher value retention options,
such as refuse (R0), reduce (R1), and reuse (R2) should be prioritised, along with strong social
justice policies. Our research proposes key policy recommendations in this regard (section
5.4.2), which are based on a detailed analysis of the current plastic management system in
the Netherlands. While these recommendations are specifically formulated for the Dutch
policy context, they might also bring valuable insights that can help both practitioners and
academics better understand and implement the transition towards a sustainable circular
plastics economy in other countries and regions.
All in all, our research has found that the dominant discourse on the CE transition for plastics
in the Netherlands assumes that the current system of mass production and consumption
can remain unchanged. Next-day deliveries and highly processed foods and products made
with components and ingredients from all over the world are thereby set as unchangeable
variables. Our research shows that the dominant imaginaries in the Netherlands are not
considering alternatives, such as neighbourhood stores and restaurants, repair cooperatives
and community-based markets of local, fresh, healthy, and seasonal goods that require
little or no packaging in the first place. We observe that the economic interests of plastic
industries, online retailers, and ultra-processed foods dominate the material and discursive
landscape upon which CE policies are formulated. Therefore, the current plastic discourse in
the Netherlands does not challenge the capitalist system of fast-paced mass consumption,
which fuels the need for so much plastic in the first place. Moreover, it replicates recycling
fairy tales and neoliberal imaginaries of continuous economic growth, which disregard
the biophysical limits of earth and the laws of thermodynamics. Under this discourse, our
findings suggest that plastic production and consumption will likely increase, leading to
significant adverse environmental and human health implications.
Further critical research on plastic and CE discourses and policies is needed; especially
regarding the construction of discursive path dependencies and institutional lock-ins that
reinforce a growth-dependent system. Alternative approaches to the plastic problem are
needed from a systemic, plural, and transdisciplinary perspective. We hope the insights and
recommendations brought by our research help bring light to this important academic and
societal debate, and that future research will further explore the manyfold social, environmental,
and political implications that the transition to a sustainable circular plastic economy entails.

155

5

Chapter 6
Sustainable Circular Cities: Analysing
Urban Circular Economy Policies in
Amsterdam, Glasgow, and Copenhagen

This chapter is based on a manuscript under review in the journal Local Environment since August 2022. It is openly
available online in the Social Science Research Network (SSRN) repository for preprints as: Calisto Friant, M., Reid, K.,
Boesler, P., Vermeulen, W.J, & Salomone, R., Sustainable Circular Cities: Analysing Urban Circular Economy Policies
in Three European Cities. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4133478 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/
ssrn.4133478
A previous version of this research was presented at the 28th International Sustainable Development Research
Society (ISDRS) Conference in June 2022, in Stockholm, Sweden.

Chapter 6

Abstract
Cities play a central role in the circular economy (CE) as they are important centres of production
and consumption responsible for 80% of global GDP. European cities are particularly important
due to their position of power in the global economy as major markets, and places of industrial
and social innovation. Yet urban CE policies and discourses remain poorly researched and
understood. This chapter aims to address this research gap by analysing and comparing the CE
policies and discourses in different European cities to draw key insights and recommendations.
It does so by first conducting a review of academic literature on urban CE policies to develop a
new conceptual framework to analyse CE discourses and policies. This framework is then used
to critically analyse and compare the CE policies of three European cities: Glasgow, Amsterdam,
and Copenhagen. Results show that technocentric approaches to CE are dominant in the three
cities. Moreover, they have rather limited social justice policies for a fair distribution of the costs
and benefits of a CE transition. Key policy recommendations to address these shortcomings are
thus developed. The insights brought about by this chapter are valuable for both practitioners
and academics seeking to improve urban CE policies.

6

158

Sustainable Circular Cities

6.1

Introduction

Global consumption rates have increased tenfold in the past 100 years and are expected
to triple by 2050 (Haas et al., 2020). This unsustainable use of natural resources is leading to
the overshoot of key planetary boundaries and the critical weakening of the life-sustaining
functions of the biosphere (Folke et al., 2021; Marín-Beltrán et al., 2022; Wiedmann et al.,
2020). The Circular Economy (CE) concept has recently become a central discourse to address
those socio-ecological challenges through various resource conservation, and recovery
strategies such as refuse, reduce, reuse, remanufacture, refurbish and recycle (Joensuu et
al., 2020; McDowall et al., 2017; Reike et al., 2018a; Temesgen et al., 2019). However, the CE
concept is still contested, often unclear and ill-defined, thus its practical implementation
remains a large societal challenge (D’Amato et al., 2019; Korhonen et al., 2018b; Lazarevic and
Valve, 2017). Cities play a crucial role for the CE as they are key centres of resource use and
transformation, responsible for around 80% of global GDP (World Bank, 2021). Cities currently
consume approximately 80% of global natural resources, produce 50% of global waste, and
75% of greenhouse gas emissions (Williams, 2019). As urban populations are expected to
increase in the future, these figures will only continue to grow. Moreover, cities are directly
in charge of key sustainability and CE-related policies, such as waste management, water
and energy provision, transportation, housing, and industrial development. Urban circular
economy policies thus have a key impact on the metabolic stocks and flows of resources,
waste, capital, labour, knowledge, energy, and materials that societies process (the so-called
Urban metabolism50) (Feiferytė-Skirienė and Stasiškienė, 2021; Lucertini and Musco, 2020;
Venkata Mohan et al., 2020). Furthermore, cities also face various key socio-economic issues
such as income inequality, social injustice, unemployment, financial austerity, and housing
shortages (Bassens et al., 2020; Williams, 2021).
European cities are particularly important for CE as they occupy a position of power in the
global economy as canters of consumption, capital accumulation and social and industrial
innovation. Moreover, European cities are frontrunners in CE implementation, especially
since the implementation of the European Union’s (EU) 2015 CE action plan (Fratini et al.,
2019; Kębłowski et al., 2020; Petit-Boix and Leipold, 2018; Prendeville et al., 2018). European
cities will thus strongly influence the overall understanding of the CE and can shape the
discourse and future implementation of urban CE policies throughout the whole world.
Yet, their diverse and often contrasting CE policies remain poorly researched, compared
and understood (Gravagnuolo et al., 2019; Joensuu et al., 2020; Marin and De Meulder, 2018;
Paiho et al., 2020; Vanhuyse et al., 2021). This paper seeks to address the above research gap,
by asking the following question: How can urban circularity policies and discourses be critically
50 Urban metabolism can generally be defined as “the sum total of the technical and socio-economic processes
that occur in cities, resulting in growth, production of energy, and elimination of waste” (Castán Broto et al.,
2012). The concept of urban metabolism facilitated the analysis of how resources, materials, energy, power,
wealth, labour, and knowledge flows within cities, as well as the socio-political structure that governs who
controls these flows and how they are distributed (Swyngedouw, 2015).

159

6

Chapter 6

analysed and compared, and what discourse is advanced by different circular city policies in
Europe?
To answer this question this chapter carries out an academic literature review to develop
a CE policy-discourse framework, which acts as the analytical tool to explore and compare
how CE manifests in different cities. This framework is then applied to 3 case studies in
Europe (Glasgow, Copenhagen and Amsterdam) to improve our understanding of CE
implementation in urban areas. Results from this research lead to valuable insights on the
strengths and limitations of current CE policies in European cities. The discussion section
then critically compares our findings to develop key policy recommendations, which can
help both academics and practitioners better design and implement CE interventions at
the city scale.

6.2

Theoretical and conceptual background

While the use of the term CE as such is rather recent, the theoretical underpinnings
of the concept have existed since at least the mid-20th century (Blomsma and Brennan,
2017; Geissdoerfer et al., 2017; Gregson et al., 2015). Indeed, the CE can best be seen as an
umbrella concept that includes a variety of different ideas and visions from the global north
and south alike (Calisto Friant et al., 2020; Homrich et al., 2018).
CE thinking can be divided into 3 main historical periods (Reike et al., 2018a). Between 1945
and 1980, a plurality of precursors to the CE emerged with publications and ideas such as
The Closing Circle (Commoner, 1971), the Limits to Growth (D. Meadows et al., 1972), Steady
State Economics (Daly, 1977), the Tragedy of the Commons (Hardin, 1968), Small is Beautiful
(Schumacher, 1973), and Post-Scarcity Anarchism (Bookchin, 1971). This period brought the
key socio-ecological challenges of the linear industrial system to light and proposed a rich
variety of alternatives to our growth-dependent capitalist society

6

Between the 1980s and 2000, with the rise of neoliberalist economic thinking, new
approaches to resource and waste management were created, which focused on
technological solutions to close the input and output side of the economy. Innovative
approaches to resource-efficiency were thus developed during this period such as
Industrial Ecology (Frosch and Gallopoulos, 1989), Reverse Logistics (Rogers and TibbenLembke, 1998), Extended Producer Responsibility (Lindhqvist, 2000), Product Service
System (Goedkoop et al., 1999) and Biomimicry (Benyus, 1998). These concepts often took
inspiration from nature to build technologies and business models that could bring winwin solutions for nature and the economy and thereby decouple economic growth from
environmental exploitation.
In the early 2000s, social justice, and participation concerns, which were prevalent in the
1970s were brought back to the discursive stage. Concepts such as Spiral Economy (Ashby

160

Sustainable Circular Cities

et al., 2019), Symbiotic Economy (Delannoy, 2017), Regenerative capitalism (Fullerton,
2015), the Sharing Economy (Frenken, 2017) and the Blue Economy (Pauli, 2010) were thus
developed, which built on the technological innovations of the 80s and 90s by adding
social elements. During this period more transformational perspectives on circularity also
emerged such as Degrowth (Latouche, 2009), Buen Vivir (Gudynas and Acosta, 2011), the
Economy for the Common Good (Felber, 2015), Permacircular Economy (Arnsperger and
Bourg, 2017), and Ecological Swaraj (Kothari et al., 2014), which were sceptical about the
ability of new technologies alone to protect the planet from ecological collapse within the
constraints of the capitalist system. They thus challenged the unsustainability of a system
based on endless economic growth and saw the need for a wholescale transformation to a
post-capitalist society.
To better evaluate, understand, and navigate various CE visions and understandings
through history, this research uses the CE discourse typology developed by Calisto Friant
et al. (2020). The typology is based on extensive research on CE and its related concepts
and has been used in other research to analyse CE discourses in Norway (Hermann and
Pansera, 2020; Ortega Alvarado et al., 2021), CE discourses in Australia (Melles, 2021), Dutch
CE policies in the plastic sector (Calisto Friant et al., 2022a), urban living labs in the City of
Tampere, Finland (Särkilahti et al., 2021), CE policies at the EU level (Calisto Friant et al., 2021),
and the EU plastics strategy (Palm et al., 2021).
The typology differentiates CE discourses based on 2 core criteria (see Figure 6.1). First,
whether they are optimist or sceptical regarding the possibility that technological
innovation can prevent an ecological collapse by decoupling economic growth from
environmental degradation. Second, whether they are holistic by integrating the social
justice and political empowerment elements in their vision of circularity or segmented by
focusing on economic aspects of circularity such as new business models and resourceefficiency. The combination of the above criteria leads to four types of circular discourses:
Reformist Circular Society (optimist and holistic), Technocentric Circular Economy (optimist
and segmented), and Transformational Circular Society (sceptical and holistic), and Fortress
Circular Economy (sceptical and segmented). It is important to note, however, that some
discourses may include various elements of the four discourse types. For example, a national
government may have a prominent Technocentric Circular Economy discourse alongside
moderate notes of Reformist Circular Society (Calisto Friant et al., 2020).
In addition to the above circularity discourse typology, it is important to acknowledge the
limits and opportunities that cities have in relation to the development and implementation
of CE actions and policies. On the one hand, cities are limited due to the territorial and
regional contexts in which they are located. They are thus constrained by the policies and
regulations established at provincial, national, and international levels such as recycling and
greenhouse gas emission targets, property relations, taxation policies, trade and investment
treaties, etc. (Castán Broto et al., 2012; Paiho et al., 2020; Savini, 2019) On the other hand,

161

6

Chapter 6

cities are historically spaces of deep political contestation, protest, social change and
technological innovation (Fung and Wright, 2001; Harvey, 2012). Cities can thus experiment
with policies, strategies and approaches which are often much more politically radical or
economically innovative than what is possible at other governance levels.
Approach to social, economic, environmental and governance considerations

Optimist

Segmented

Reformist Circular Society (RCS)
- Assumptions: eco-economic decoupling is possible and
social justice and democracy is key for a circularity
transition.
- Goal: human prosperity and well-being within the
biophysical boundaries of the earth.
- Means: Technological breakthroughs and social policies
that benefit humanity and natural ecosystems.
- Example concepts: Natural Capitalism, Cradle to Cradle,
The Performance Economy, The Natural Step, The Blue
Economy, Regenerative Design.
- Proponents: international organizations, large foundations and some governments.

Technocentric Circular Economy (TCE)
- Assumptions: eco-economic decoupling is possible and
social justice and democracy is not key for a circularity
transition.
- Goal: economic prosperity and development without
negative environmental externalities.
- Means: economic innovations, new business models and
unprecedented breakthroughs in CE technologies
- Example concepts: Industrial Ecology, Reverse
Logistics, Biomimicry, Industrial Symbiosis, Cleaner
Production, Bioeconomy.
- Proponents: corporations, some national and city
governments, and international organizations.

Sceptical

Technological innovation and ecological collapse

Holistic

Transformational Circular Society (TCS)
- Assumptions: eco-economic decoupling is impossible and
social justice and democracy is key for a circularity
transition.
- Goals: A world of conviviality and frugal abundance for all,
while fairly distributing the biophysical resources of the
earth
- Means: Complete reconfiguration of the current socio-political system and a shift away from productivist and
anthropocentric worldviews.
- Example concepts: Conviviality, Steady-state economics,
Permacircular Economy, Degrowth, Social Ecology,
Buddhist Economics, Buen Vivir, Ubuntu.
- Proponents: social movements, bottom-up circular
initiatives, and indigenous movements.

Fortress Circular Economy (FCE)
- Assumptions: eco-economic decoupling is impossible and
social justice and democracy is not key for a circularity
transition.
- Goal: maintain geostrategic resource security in global
conditions where widespread resource scarcity and human
overpopulation cannot provide for all.
- Means: innovative technologies and business models
combined with rationalized resource use and migration
and population controls.
- Example concepts: The tragedy of the Commons, The
Population Bomb, Overshoot, Disaster Capitalism,
Capitalist Catastrophism.
- Proponents: Geostrategic think tanks and state policies.

FIGURE 6.1 | Circularity discourse typology (Calisto Friant et al., 2022a).

6

6.3

Methods

This research was carried out in 4 stages which are presented schematically in Figure 6.2.
The first 2 stages build upon the circularity discourse typology to develop a policy-discourse
framework which serves as a critical tool to analyse and compare the plurality of CE policies
and the associated discourses at the city level. In the third stage, case studies were selected
amongst European cities and in the fourth stage, the policy-discourse framework was
applied to analyse those case studies.

162

Sustainable Circular Cities

Step 1
Conceptual
background
based on CE
discourse
typology

Academic
literature review
on CE policies at
the city level

Step 2
Collection,
organization, and
categorization of
policies in
literature

Step 3

Step 4

Case study
selection and
document
analysis

Application of
the framework
to analyze
policies of
selected case
studies

Development of policydiscourse framework

Discussion &
recommendations

Analysis of CE policies

FIGURE 6.2 | Methodological steps.

6.3.1 Step 1: Academic literature review
The first step in building the policy-discourse framework was to conduct a literature review
to identify what circular policies at the city level are proposed and discussed in the academic
literature. The search for academic articles in this review was based on the circular discourse
typology presented earlier (Calisto Friant et al., 2020). This typology found 72 concepts and
ideas historically related to CE and divided them into 4 discourse types (see Figure 6.1).
We selected 26 of these concepts as keywords for article searches across the 4 circularity
discourse types based on relevance and availability of literature relating to urban policies51.
We thereby reviewed 2 to 6 articles for each concept depending on the number of search
results we found on Scopus. Articles were chosen based on their relevance regarding the
studied topic, that is, whether they discussed urban policies in their respective conceptual
areas. In total, 88 academic articles were thus reviewed (see Table 6.1 and supplementary
materials of Calisto Friant et al., (2022b)). All articles were found via Scopus searches, except
for Buen Vivir articles as there was a lack of relevant search results on Scopus. Indeed, Scopus
has an over-representation of literature in English (Albarillo, 2014; Morrison et al., 2012), yet
most literature on the topic of Buen Vivir is in Spanish so it was necessary to complement
the results with Google Scholar.

51 The number of concepts chosen for each circularity discourse type was proportional to their prevalence in the
CE typology. For example, Calisto Friant et al. (2020) found that the most widespread discourse within academic
literature is TCS (42% of reviewed concepts); thus, more TCS concepts were reviewed in this research than TCE
(26%), RCS (28%) and FCE (4%) respectively.

163

6

Chapter 6
TABLE 6.1 | Search terms used to identify the relevant articles.
Discourse type
General
Reformist Circular Society

Technocentric Circular Economy

Transformational circular society

Fortress Circular Economy

Concept

No. of Scopus search
results on 11/1/2021

No. of articles
reviewed

Circular Economy
Sharing Economy
Cradle to cradle
Natural Capitalism
Regenerative Design
Cyclical Economy
The Natural Step
Material Efficiency
Industrial Ecology
Biomimicry
Bioeconomy
Industrial Symbiosis
Eco-industrial Parks
Product Service Systems
Cleaner Production
Ecofeminism
Deep Ecology
Social Ecology
Radical pluralism
Transition Towns
Degrowth
Buen Vivir
Permaculture
Ubuntu
Ecological Civilisation
Disaster Capitalism
Fortress Europe

153
91
36
6
60
3
4
39
128
65
64
38
93
12
63
28
17
37
7
31
62
19
33
6
70
23
10

17
4
3
2
3
1
1
2
3
3
3
2
3
1
3
2
2
2
1
4
6
4
3
1
3
6
3

6.3.2 Step 2: Collection, organization, and categorization of policies

6

The next step involved the careful review of each article and the collection of all the urban
circularity policies which they mentioned. This led to an initial list of 114 different policies.
These policies were then refined and combined to reduce redundancies and inconsistencies,
resulting in a final list of 48 policies. We then divided these into 12 policy areas and 3 policy
categories based on the different circularity policy areas we found in the literature (see
Table 6.2). Subsequently, the identified policies were assigned to one of the four circularity
discourse types based on the extent to which each policy would reflect and reproduce one
of the discourses.

164

Sustainable Circular Cities
TABLE 6.2 | Policy areas identified in the literature review.
Policy category

Waste & Material
Resource Flows

Built Environment
& Spatial Planning

Socio-political
Structure

No. of No. of policies per discourse type*
policies
TCE
RCS
TCS
FCE

Policy area
Renewable Energy
Waste Management
Water Management
Food & Organic Waste Streams
Transport & Mobility
Green Buildings
Urban Form & Territorial Planning
Ecosystems & Nature-Based Solutions
Economic & Industrial Policy
Governance & Municipal Operations
Education & Knowledge Development
Social Justice & Livelihoods

2
6
3
4
4
5
4
2
5
5
4
4

1
5
2
1
1
2
1
0
2
3
1
0

1
1
0
2
3
2
1
1
0
2
2
1

0
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
2
0
1
3

0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0

*TCE: Technocentric Circular Economy, RCS: Reformist Circular Society, FCE: Fortress Circular Economy, TCS:
Transformational Circular Society

6.3.3 Step 3: Case-study selection and document analysis
To select case studies, we first formed an initial sample of circular city cases by searching
cities mentioned in academic literature as well as circular city alliances and examples of
circular cities mentioned by practitioner organizations such as the Circular City Declaration,
the ICLEI Circulars leading circular city list, the Ellen McArthur Foundation (EMF) circular city
examples, and the OECD circular city case-studies52. This led to an initial list of 48 European
cities. Within this set of cities, we searched for those with a CE strategy published at least
in 2018 or later. This is key since the CE discourse is continuously evolving, we thus seek to
review relatively recent CE policies to ensure our research investigates the present discourse
and vision of the topic. This also allows us to avoid redundancies with previously published
research on earlier circular city strategies and policies. Due to language restrictions, only
cases with policy documents in Portuguese, Spanish, French, Danish, and English were
selected. All in all, only Amsterdam, Glasgow, and Copenhagen fit all the above criteria and
52 List of examined circular city initiatives and networks: Circular City Declaration (https://circularcitiesdeclaration.
eu/), the C40 Cities list of Circular cities (https://www.c40.org/researches/municipality-led-circular-economy),
OECD circular city case-studies (https://www.oecd.org/cfe/regionaldevelopment/circular-economy-cities.
htm), the Ellen McArthur Foundation circular city examples (https://ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/topics/
cities/examples), the Climate-KIC circular cities project (https://nordic.climate-kic.org/success-stories/
circular-cities-project/), EU circular urban agenda members (https://futurium.ec.europa.eu/en/urban-agenda/
circular-economy/pages/members), ICLEI Circulars leading circular city list (https://circulars.iclei.org/), Circular
City Governance case-studies (https://vlaanderen-circulair.be/circulargovernance/index.html), Circular City
Funding Guide case studies (https://www.circularcityfundingguide.eu/case-studies/), EU SHARING project
cities stakeholders (https://www.espon.eu/sharing), Circle Economy circular city projects (https://www.circleeconomy.com/programmes/cities/services), Zero waste cities best practice list (https://zerowastecities.eu/
bestpractice/the-story-of-roubaix/), Carbon Neutral Cities Alliance (https://carbonneutralcities.org/cities/).

165

6

Chapter 6

were thus selected as case studies for this research53.
Once the case studies were chosen their CE strategies and associated policy documents
were reviewed and analysed to establish a critical understanding of the cities’ visions of CE,
including their main goals, targets, definitions, assumptions, and governance mechanisms.
The policy documents analysed included the main CE action plans or strategies and other
associated documents published by the local city governments or their partners in the
initiative (see Table 6.3).
TABLE 6.3 | Data sources for policy analysis and policy-discourse framework.
Publisher

Date published

Document

2020

Amsterdam Circular 2020-2025 Strategy

2020

Amsterdam Circular Monitor

2020

The Amsterdam City Doughnut: A Tool for Transformative Action

2020

Amsterdam Circular 2020-2025 Innovation and Implementation
Programme (Innovatie- en Uitvoeringsprogramma) 2020-2021

Glasgow
City Council

2020

Circular Economy Route Map for Glasgow

2020

Circular Economy Route Map for Glasgow Committee Document

Copenhagen Municipality

2019

Circular Copenhagen: Resource and Waste Management Plan 2024

Municipality of
Amsterdam

6.3.4 Step 4 Application of the policy-discourse framework
The policy discourse framework is summarised in table 6.4 (see supplementary materials of
Calisto Friant et al., (2022b) for detailed version).

6

The policy-discourse framework measures the strength of the relationship between the
selected cities CE action plans/strategies and one of the four circularity discourse types
and the level of commitment each city has to the different policy areas. The strength of the
relationship to the discourse type and level of commitment to different policy areas was
defined using a scale of 1-5 (Table 6.5).

53 The search for case studies took place from March to April 2021, any circular city policy published after those
dates could thus not be considered for this study.

166

Sustainable Circular Cities
TABLE 6.4 | Summarised policy-discourse framework.

Socio-political Structure

Policy
Category

Policy
Area

Policy

Economic and
industrial policy

Supporting CE businesses, entrepreneurs, and start-ups.
Deregulating to foster innovation and foreign investment.
Supporting local cooperatives and the social and solidarity
economy.

TCE
TCE
TCS

Creating capacity for deindustrialisation and low-tech selfsufficiency.

TCS

Shifting public services to the private sector.
Creating bottom-up participatory governance.
Facilitating collaborative partnerships with private sector.
Establishing digital monitoring and evaluation systems.
Creating or improving environmental standards.
Circular procurement and management of municipal goods and
infrastructure.

FCE
RCS
TCE
TCE
TCE
RCS

Communication initiatives to encourage resource recovery and
recycling.

TCE

Cultural transformation towards slower, healthier and more
convivial ways of life.

TCS

Training and capacity building to spread CE technical skills and
knowledge.

RCS

Collaborative research and knowledge development on CE.
Social inclusivity and equality in access to urban infrastructure and
services.

RCS
TCS

Housing cooperatives, community housing and social housing.
Local currencies and cooperative banking.
Supporting sharing economy activities and projects.
Centralised renewable energy production.
Decentralised, community-owned renewable energy production.
Improving waste recovery and recycling infrastructure and
technologies.

TCS
TCS
RCS
TCE
RCS
TCE

Creating and/or supporting secondary materials market.
Economic incentives to reduce non-recyclable waste generation.
Fostering urban mining activities (material and energy recovery
from landfills).

TCE
TCE
TCE

Restricting single-use packaging and encouraging reusable
packaging.

RCS

Promoting industrial and urban symbiosis and establishing ecoindustrial parks.

TCE

Recovery and recycling of resources from wastewater.
Increasing the efficiency of water provision.
Establishing progressive incentives to reduce water consumption.
Supporting and promoting urban and peri-urban agriculture.
Promoting household and community composting of bio-waste.
Establishing centralised bio-waste recycling systems.
Reducing food waste and encouraging sustainable diets.

TCE
TCE
TCS
RCS
TCS
TCE
RCS

Governance
and municipal
operations

Education and
knowledge
development

Social justice
and livelihoods

Renewable
energy

Waste and Material Resource Flows

Waste
management

Water
management
Food and organic
waste streams

Discourse
type*

167

6

Chapter 6

Built Environment and Spatial Planning

Policy
Category

Policy
Area

Policy

Transport and
mobility

Improving and encouraging shared mobility (bike-sharing,
ridesharing etc.).

RCS

Improving public transport infrastructure and promoting its use.
Improving active transport (walking, cycling) infrastructure and
promoting it.

RCS
RCS

Promoting private green transportation technologies (electric cars
etc.).

TCE

Setting circular construction standards and regulations.
Fostering circular recovery of demolition materials.
Infrastructure refurbishment, rehabilitation, renovation, and
repurposing.

TCE
TCE
RCS

Redistributing unused buildings and preventing unfair
accumulation of housing.

TCS

Promoting shared building uses such as shared workspaces and
co-housing.

RCS

Construction of private conflict and disaster protection
infrastructure.

FCE

Planning compact multi-functional and convivial neighbourhoods.
Building infrastructure for city-wide climate resilience and
adaptation.

RCS
TCE

Fostering urban-rural symbiosis and supporting rural livelihoods.
Providing and maintaining ecosystem services by creating green
infrastructure.

TCS
RCS

Strictly conserving, restoring, and protecting biodiversity to create
harmony between social and natural ecosystems.

TCS

Green Buildings

Urban form
and territorial
planning

Ecosystems and
nature-based
solutions

Discourse
type*

*TCE: Technocentric Circular Economy, RCS: Reformist Circular Society, FCE: Fortress Circular Economy, TCS:
Transformational Circular Society
TABLE 6.5 | Assessment scale for policy-discourse framework.
Scale

6

Explanation

0 = The policy is not
mentioned in the CE
route map/strategy
1 = The policy just
mentioned in the
plan or very little action
is taken

The city government doesn’t mention or address this policy area at all.

2 = Limited action is
taken

One or more limited actions or projects are established but a rather limited impact can be
expected from their implementation, and much more could be done in that policy area.

3 = Some action is
taken but more could
be done
4 = Strong action is
taken

One or more actions and projects are developed, which would have some impact on
the target policy area, but they remain limited in many ways.

5 = Very strong action
is taken

Would entail the city government strongly committing to the respective policy area
with impactful actions, regulations, and/or measures that can bring about significant
change in the area.

Policies in the area are mentioned but no specific actions or commitments are taken
(for example, a city might mention the importance of renewable energies but have no
project to actually improve renewable energy generation) or the actions involve only
small research project(s) with no concrete impact on the policy area.

Strong policies are developed and supported by the city government in a consistent
manner, yet a few more actions could still be envisaged in this area to be fully effective.

168

Sustainable Circular Cities

The total number of points available per discourse type and policy area were calculated
by multiplying the total number of possible policies in each policy area or discourse type
by 5 (the maximum value on the scale). Table 6.6 and 6.7 note the number of policies per
discourse type and policy area and the total number of points available. As there are an
unequal number of policies per discourse type and per policy area in the framework, the
strength of the commitment to the discourse types and different policy areas was calculated
as a percentage using the following equations to allow for direct comparison:
TABLE 6.6 | Number of policies per policy area and the total number of points available.
Policy sub-category
Waste & Material
Resource Flows

Built Environment &
Spatial Planning

Socio-political
Structure

Policy area

No. of policies

No. of points available
in each policy area

Renewable Energy
Waste Management
Water Management
Food & Organic Waste Streams
Transport & Mobility
Green Buildings
Urban Form & Territorial Planning
Ecosystems & Nature-Based Solutions
Economic & Industrial Policy
Governance & Municipal Operations
Education & Knowledge Development
Social Justice & Livelihoods

2
6
3
4
4
5
4
2
5
5
4
4

10
30
15
20
20
25
20
10
25
25
20
20

TABLE 6.7 | Number of policies per discourse type and total number of points available.
Discourse Type*
TCE
RCS
TCS
FCE

No. of policies

No. of points available in each discourse type

19
16
11
2

95
80
55
10

*TCE: Technocentric Circular Economy, RCS: Reformist Circular Society, FCE: Fortress Circular Economy, TCS:
Transformational Circular Society

The abovementioned coding and grading system of the policy-discourse framework
was thus applied to all case studies to analyse and critically compare their CE strategies
in a systematic and consistent manner. This comparative case study approach allows for
a rich and detailed study of the topic (Stewart, 2012) that can be replicated across other
contexts and circumstances (Mills et al., 2012). This is key as cities are inherently complex
and are formed by a myriad of actors, organisations, and networks (Prendeville et al., 2018).
Furthermore, comparative case studies, like this one, are well suited to developing key
policy insights and recommendations (Løkke and Sørensen, 2014; Stake, 2005).

169

6

Chapter 6

6.4

Results

6.4.1 Amsterdam’s circularity approach
Amsterdam is the capital of the Netherlands and the country’s largest and most populated
city. The city is in a central location within the Netherlands for the industry, service, and
finance sectors and has the 4th largest port in Europe (Fratini et al., 2019).
In 2016, the Dutch government released the government-wide program ‘A Circular
Economy in the Netherlands by 2050’ intending to reduce the use of primary raw materials
by 50% by 2030 and to establish a fully circular economy by 2050 (Government of the
Netherlands, 2016). At a local level, Amsterdam developed its first circular action plan in
2012 and its first circular strategy in 2016 (Campbell-Johnston et al., 2019; Fratini et al., 2019).
In 2020, the municipal government published its most recent CE policy: the ‘Amsterdam
Circular Strategy 2020-2025’ (Municipality of Amsterdam, 2020a). Amsterdam’s CE strategy
was developed with the support of Circle Economy and used Kate Raworth’s Doughnut
Economics as a guiding model (Municipality of Amsterdam, 2020b)54.
Amsterdam’s circular strategy places the transition towards a CE in the context of the
ecological crisis and the need for social justice. The strategy acknowledges the socioecological impact of the city’s unsustainable consumption practices on people and
ecosystems in the Global South. It states its overall goal as follows:
“Amsterdam desires broad prosperity. By this we mean that material wealth is not
the only measure for a good life. It also involves things like wellbeing, sufficient
leisure time, good health, a pleasant living environment and space for personal
growth. We want to be a modern, thriving and inclusive city for everyone, taking
into account the boundaries that the planet imposes on us. Amsterdam is aware
of the impact of its consumption and production, both within and far beyond its
own city limits.”

6

(Municipality of Amsterdam, 2020a p17)

Following the doughnut model, the CE is positioned within a framework that fosters
social wellbeing within planetary boundaries (Municipality of Amsterdam, 2020c). Thus,
at the outset, Amsterdam takes a more holistic definition of the CE which is in line with
the RCS discourse. However, within the strategy, there seems to be a contradiction in the
54 The doughnut model proposes a social foundation and ecological ceiling for the planet. The inner ring of
the doughnut sets the minimum we need to lead good life and to thrive and includes concerns such as
health, housing, social equity, political voice, and income work (Raworth, 2017). The outer ring represents the
ecological ceiling and is comprised of nine planetary boundaries developed by Rockström et al. (2009) to
define the ‘safe operating space for humanity’ in relation to the environment. According to the municipality, the
doughnut model’s representation of the CE shows the interconnected nature of the city and offers a unique
perspective of a society that can thrive in a sustainable, safe and equitable way (Municipality of Amsterdam,
2020a).

170

Sustainable Circular Cities

Municipality’s discursive position on economic growth and decoupling. The strategy states
that:
“Every year, we see more extraction of raw materials, higher energy consumption
and increasing greenhouse gas emissions. These trends are in line with the growth
of the global economy and population.”
(Municipality of Amsterdam, 2020a p10)

Hence, the municipality clearly links economic growth to the socio-ecological problems of
the 21st century. Yet, in another segment, the Municipality notes that decoupling economic
growth and environmental pressures will be possible and the way forward to approach
these challenges:
“All things considered, this is the great challenge for the 21st century: to give
ourselves and others a fair chance at a good life, while separating economic
growth from the pressure on the environment.”
(Municipality of Amsterdam, 2020a p11)

Despite this clear problematization of the socio-ecological impacts of current consumption
and production patterns, the conceptualization of the CE in Amsterdam is predominantly
defined as a method of waste prevention, promoting resource efficiency, economic savings,
and reducing emissions. The municipality’s overarching targets are for Amsterdam to reduce
CO2 emissions by 55% by 2030 and by 95% by 2050, to halve the use of new raw materials
by 2030, and to become fully circular by 2050 (Municipality of Amsterdam 2020a). Therefore,
only material and energy efficiency goals are measured with clear targets. Regarding
societal concerns, there are only broad overarching visions for the future of Amsterdam
as a progressive and prosperous city, with no tangible targets to measure their progress
in this regard. Nonetheless, it is worth noting that the municipality has acknowledged this
limitation and is still in the process of developing a system for modelling social well-being
and prosperity (Municipality of Amsterdam, 2020d).
All in all, the discourses used by the Municipality of Amsterdam align with RCS; supporting
the idea that one must enable a reformed form of capitalism where eco-economic
decoupling is possible, and technological innovations can enhance ecological health,
prosperity and wellbeing for all.
6.4.1.1 Circularity policies
Applying the conceptual framework to Amsterdam’s CE policies (see sections 6.3.3 and
6.3.4) results show that the strongest actions are taken in the policy areas of governance
and municipal operations (72%), education, and knowledge development (65%), food and
organic waste streams (70%) and waste management (50%). On the contrary, there is a
lack of consideration for nature-based solutions (10%), urban form and territorial planning
(10%), renewable energy (10%), and transport and mobility (15%) (see Figure 6.3).

171

6

Chapter 6

Te r
rri ba
to n
ria
l

re
uctu
Str

n&
catio
Eduowledgeent
Kn elopm
Dev

%

10%

10
10

%

15%

&
ort
Transpbility
Mo

Soc
ia
Livel Justice &
lihoo
ds

40%

65%

Gre
Buildien
ngs

36%

30%

&

So
c

cal
iti
ol
-p
io

Go
M ve
Op un rn
er i
a

i
rm nn
Fo Pla

%
72

Built Envi
ronm
en
t

Econ
Industriomic &
al Po
licy

&
ce l
an ipa ns
c io
t

Sp
at
ia
l
U

re-

atu
s&N
ng
stemSolutions
i
y
s
n
d
EcoBase
an
Pl
g
& n

20%

%

70

50%
w
rg abl
y e

& S
od te
Fo as
W

O
tr rga
ea n
m ic
s

ne e
Re En

Wa

Ma Water
nag
emen
t

ste
&

e
Wast ment
e
Manag

Material Resource F

low

s

FIGURE 6.3 | Policy areas addressed in Amsterdam’s CE strategy.

6

Waste and material resource flows (44%)
Amsterdam takes strong action in the policy area of food and organic waste streams
(70%). The municipality acts to promote urban agriculture and the consumption of locally
grown food by promoting regional food hubs. Moreover, the city aims to encourage both
household composting and bio-digestion as well as centralized bio-waste management
systems through the deployment of collection containers. The strategy also encourages
citizens to shift towards plant-based diets through the Amsterdam Healthy Weight
Programme.
The Municipality of Amsterdam is also committed to tackling waste management and
recycling (50%), by improving waste collection and recycling and by fostering the creation of
secondary materials markets thanks to digital tools and technologies. The municipality also
plans to support urban industrial symbiosis through research programs and experiments
and the creation of circular material depots.

172

Sustainable Circular Cities

Little action is taken concerning water management (20%) and renewable energy (10%)
as only small research projects are carried out in those areas on the recovery and recycling
of wastewater, the efficiency of water provision in swimming pools and green hydrogen
production.
Built environment and spatial planning (21%)
There is a general lack of focus on the built environment and spatial planning. Ecosystems
and nature-based solutions (10%) are only included through an experimental food
forest project, and in terms of urban form and territorial planning (10%) policies, the
municipality is only focused on fostering urban-rural symbiosis through their participation
in a European research project. Furthermore, around transport and mobility (15%), the
municipality is only supporting the circular construction of an extension to the northsouth railway line. Commitments in the area of green buildings (40%) are stronger, with
policies to improve the environmental performance standards of buildings by working
with developers and other municipal partners to establish minimum circularity and
sustainability requirements such as adaptive design, modular construction, and reduced
energy consumption. Furthermore, the Municipality of Amsterdam has many pilot projects,
on the circular recovery of demolition waste and on the repurposing and renovation of old
buildings and infrastructure to increase material and energy efficiency. With these policies,
Amsterdam seeks that by 2025, 50% of all building renovation and maintenance activities
follow principles of circular construction.
Socio-political structure (51%)
The municipality is most committed to policies regarding governance and municipal
operations (72%). It is establishing and participating in over 20 public-private partnerships
to improve circular innovations in various economic sectors. The municipality also places
a significant focus on circular public procurement and public infrastructure as a way to
encourage businesses to adopt more circular models. With these policies, the city is aiming
for 100% circular procurement and a 20% reduction in public consumption by 2030.
Furthermore, the city is creating a monitoring and evaluating system and a data platform
to investigate waste streams throughout the city. Amsterdam also has a few participatory
projects to obtain residents’ perspectives to make some neighbourhoods more circular.
In terms of education and knowledge development (65%) policies, the municipality is
engaging in many communication initiatives to raise awareness of circularity and change
behaviours, particularly regarding sustainable diets and the sharing of goods. Furthermore,
the municipality is supporting projects to reskill and educate citizens on the CE and is
working with universities and research facilities to carry out various research projects and
urban living labs.
Concerning economic and industrial (36%) policies, the municipality supports CE
initiatives and start-ups with a plethora of research programs to develop and assess

173

6

Chapter 6

technological innovations for the CE transition. The municipality also supports deregulation
and liberalization to support innovation and foreign investment in new CE initiatives.
Moreover, the strategy promotes the local production and consumption of goods through
initiatives such as Amsterdam Made. Lastly, in terms of social justice and livelihoods (30%)
policies, the municipality predominantly focused on promoting sharing economy activities
by establishing a circular second-hand depot and training facility to make sharing more
accessible. Beyond the sharing economy, however, there is no substantial commitment to
fostering inclusivity and social justice and only a small research project is being carried out
on community land trusts (see supplementary materials of Calisto Friant et al. (2022b) for
further details on all the circularity policies established by the city of Amsterdam).
6.4.1.2 Policy-discourse type
Overall, based on the policies proposed within the CE strategy, Amsterdam is aligned with
both the TCE (51.58%) and RCS (45%) discourses (Figure 6.4), indicating a strong level of
optimism about the role of technological innovation in preventing economic collapse and
some concern for the integration of social justice elements into its CE transition.

6

Optimist
Skeptical

Technological innovation and ecological
collapse

Approach to social, economic, environmental and governance considerations
Holistic

Segmented

Reformist Circular Society

Technocentric Circular Economy
51,58%

45,00%

18,18%

Fortress Circular Economy

Transformational Circular Society

FIGURE 6.4 | Presence of the four circularity discourse types in Amsterdam.

6.4.2 Glasgow’s circularity approach
Glasgow is Scotland’s largest and most populated city with diverse sectors relevant to the
CE such as retail, financial services, engineering, manufacturing, and digital technology
(Invest Glasgow, n.d.).
CE policy in Scotland was first set out in the ‘Making Things Last’ strategy in 2016 to develop
a comprehensive approach to extended producer responsibility and to address and expose
the costs of recycling and disposal in the region (Scottish Government, 2016). Overall, the
CE strategy in Scotland is heavily focused on the management of material and resource
174

Sustainable Circular Cities

flows (Scottish Government, 2016). Within Glasgow, the transition towards a CE first began
in 2016, when the Glasgow Chamber of Commerce (GCC), Zero Waste Scotland, and the
Glasgow City Council published ‘Circular Glasgow’ (GCC, 2019). This laid the groundwork for
the creation of Glasgow’s CE route map, which was designed and published by Glasgow
City Council in October 2020 (Glasgow City Council, 2020a).
The city of Glasgow situates the transition to a CE within the context of various overlapping
and complex social and environmental problems. The city council provides an extensive
critique of the current linear system noting that:
“the forty year globalised neo-liberal project to reduce government, the chronic
depletion of essential public services throughout the UK, to prioritise GDP, and
promote consumer capitalism has presented us with a set of disastrous outcomes.”
(Glasgow City Council, 2020a, p16)

Neoliberal capitalism is thus seen as the source of various socio-ecological challenges such
as inequality, poverty, and climate change (Glasgow City Council, 2020a). The COVID-19
pandemic has, according to the council, highlighted the fragility of hyper-globalization and
its complex international supply chains, and the need to return to a more localized and
equitable economic system (Glasgow City Council, 2020b). Hence, the City Council intends
a vision for the CE route map aiming to…
“…promote a message of considered consumption and provide a challenge to
the current wasteful consumerist practices(…)”.
(Glasgow City Council, 2020b, p2)

To change consumption practices, according to the council, there must be a paradigm shift
in consumer culture and a large commitment to changing working practices and business
models (Glasgow City Council, 2020a). Moreover, The City Council sees the need to address
deprivation and social exclusion as a key element in the transition to a CE (Glasgow City
Council, 2020a).
The Council defines the CE according to the concept of Cradle to Cradle (C2C) which is
based on the idea of “the economy being restorative and regenerative – that is, economic
activities should strengthen rather than break down social and environmental resources”
(McDonough & Braungart, 2002 cited in Glasgow City Council 2020a). Moreover, while
benefiting the environment, the City Council notes that the CE will also support job
creation and provide economic opportunities for deprived and unemployed communities
(Glasgow City Council, 2020a). The Glasgow City Council also follows the Ellen MacArthur
Foundation’s understanding of CE (which echoes C2C rhetoric), noting that the transition
towards a CE should take a systemic approach to economic development, benefitting the
environment, society, and businesses and lead to the gradual decoupling of economic
growth from resource consumption (Glasgow City Council, 2020a).

175

6

Chapter 6

Overall, Glasgow’s CE route map shows a strong awareness of the socio-environmental
impacts related to the overconsumption of resources and the overshoot of ecological
boundaries. Moreover, it gives key importance to issues of social justice, fairness, and equity.
However, it does not view the CE transition as a way to radically transform its economic and
political system beyond capitalism, but rather to stimulate change within the boundaries of
capitalism by transitioning away from its dominant neoliberal form. It thereby seeks strong
social, technical and economic innovations that enable eco-economic decoupling. Glasgow
City Council’s understanding of the CE is, hence very much in line with the RCS discourse type.
6.4.2.1 Circularity policies
Applying the conceptual framework to Glasgows’s CE route map (see sections 6.3.3 and
6.3.4) demonstrate that the main policy actions are taken in the areas of education and
knowledge development (75%), governance and municipal operations (72%) and transport
and mobility (45%). The policy areas least explored within Glasgow’s CE route map are
water management (0%), urban form and territorial planning (10%), and social justice and
livelihoods (15%) (Figure 6.5).

Te r
rri ba
to n
ria
l

%

%

30

Soc
ia
Livel Justice &
lihoo
ds

15%

10

%

40%
45%

27%

30

&

Gre
Buildien
ngs

75%

24%

w
rg abl
y e

& S
od te
Fo as
W

O
tr rga
ea n
m ic
s

ne e
Re En

Wa

Ma Water
nag
emen
t

ste
&

n&
catio
Eduowledgeent
Kn elopm
Dev

30%

re
uctu
Str

%

72

Built Envi
ronm
en
t

So
c
cal
iti
ol
-p
io

Go
M ve
Op un rn
er i
a

i
rm nn
Fo Pla

&
ort
Transpbility
Mo

6

Econ
Industriomic &
al Po
licy

&
ce l
an ipa ns
c io
t

Sp
at
ia
l
U

re-

atu
s&N
stemSolutions
ing
y
s
n
d
EcoBase
an
Pl
& ng

e
Wast ment
e
Manag

Material Resource F

low

FIGURE 6.5 | Policy areas addressed within Glasgow’s CE route map.

176

s

Sustainable Circular Cities

Waste and material resource flows
There is a minimal level of commitment from Glasgow City Council concerning waste and
material resource flow policies. There are no water management (0%) policies included
in the CE route map, however, there are several waste management (27%) policies. For
instance, Glasgow City Council is highly committed to supporting the creation of a
secondary materials market. To do so, it is creating a municipal material passport that would
help coordinate and catalogue all materials in construction projects in Glasgow. Moreover,
the Glasgow City Council is creating a virtual business exchange platform to match up
waste streams and material inputs as well as an online material-sharing hub to connect
citizens and organisations.
Within food and organic waste stream (30%) policies, Glasgow City Council is running citywide schemes to support businesses using sustainable, healthy, plant-based, low-carbon,
and local produce. Through the Glasgow food growing strategy, the council is also helping
citizens gain access to community growth opportunities including land, allotments, and
financial resources.
In terms of renewable energy (30%), Glasgow City Council is supporting decentralized
renewable energy production and explores opportunities to establish local and district
heating networks and assist the uptake of community energy projects.
Built environment and spatial planning
Within the transport and mobility (45%) policy area, the city council is expanding
the current bike and electric car hire services, widening pavements for pedestrians,
expanding bike lanes, supporting the Glasgow metro initiative to improve public transport
infrastructure, and even exploring the possibility of developing a public transport system
that is free of charge. Within urban form and territorial planning (10%), the city council
wants to create a 20-minute city through its Liveable Neighbourhoods program. However,
progress is in its early stages and is, thus far, relying on change being driven by and within
communities.
In terms of green buildings (40%), Glasgow City Council seeks to upscale the adoption of
circular construction techniques such as modular construction and design for disassembly.
It is also encouraging the retrofitting, rehabilitation, and renovation of buildings to improve
energy and resource efficiency and aims to repurpose vacant council units to create
incubator co-working facilities for circular businesses.
Lastly, with ecosystems and nature-based solutions (30%) policies, Glasgow City Council
is looking to open-up unused vacant land to provide more green spaces in the city and
make room for community gardening.

177

6

Chapter 6

Socio-political structure
In terms of social justice and livelihood (15%) policies, the council focuses on promoting
sharing and repair activities, predominantly through partnerships and pilot projects with
local CSOs, repair networks and second-hand stores.
Glasgow City Council is committed to various governance and municipal operations
(72%) policies. For example, the City Council is prioritizing circular practices, business
models, and eco-design within its procurement and tender processes and is working to
make local schools and clinics and hospitals more circular. Furthermore, Glasgow City
Council is also participating in various public-private partnerships and is collaborating
and connecting with other circular cities around the world to share findings, insights and
innovations. In terms of creating or improving environmental standards, the city council
has established a low-emissions zone for vehicles. Moreover, the city is engaged in various
monitoring schemes to better evaluate waste streams and establish social and ecological
boundaries. Similarly, Glasgow City Council is committed to various education and
knowledge development (75%) policies, for example, they are working to implement a CE
communications strategy to influence consumer behaviour and promote the reuse, repair,
and sharing of goods. Moreover, Glasgow City Council is a partner in various reskilling and
upskilling programs to promote capacity building and knowledge development and has
embedded teaching on the CE within nursery and primary school curriculums. Lastly, with
economic and industrial (24%) policies, Glasgow City Council has discussed various ideas
within the CE route map, however, only a few are carried out in practice. For example, the city
council is supporting circular innovation and start-ups by establishing a circular Kickstarter
fund, which will provide financial resources and support knowledge development, give
rent reductions, and create the possibility of occupying vacant council buildings free of
charge (see supplementary materials of Calisto Friant et al., (2022b) for further details on all
the circularity policies established by the city of Glasgow).
6.4.2.2 Policy-discourse type

6

Overall, based upon the policies proposed within the CE route map, Glasgow is most strongly
aligned with the RCS discourse (60%) and is to some degree aligned with the TCE discourse
(35.79%), indicating a high level of optimism about the role of technological innovation in
preventing economic collapse and a relatively strong inclusion of socio-political concerns
within its CE policies (Figure 6.6).

178

Sustainable Circular Cities

Optimist

Holistic

Segmented

Reformist Circular Society

Technocentric Circular Economy

60,00%
35,79%

1,81%
Skeptical

Technological innovation and ecological
collapse

Approach to social, economic, environmental and governance considerations

Fortress Circular Economy

Transformational Circular Society

FIGURE 6.6 | Presence of the four circularity discourse types in Glasgow.

6.4.3 Copenhagen’s circularity approach
Copenhagen is the capital of Denmark and the country’s cultural, economic, and governmental
centre. Copenhagen is one of the major financial centres of Northern Europe (Krogh Jensen,
2019) and the city’s industry is mainly focused on the service sector with a strong focus on
information technology, pharmaceuticals, and clean technology (Dansk Erhverv, n.d.).
In Denmark, the concept of the circular economy rose to prominence in 2015, when the
Ellen MacArthur Foundation conducted a case study on circular economy policymaking
and its opportunities in the country (EMF, 2015). In 2018, based on recommendations of
various Danish CEOs, the Danish government launched its “Strategy for Circular Economy”.
Overall, the CE strategy in Denmark is heavily focused on promoting ‘green growth’,
increasing resource productivity, and waste prevention (Advisory Board for CE, 2017;
Ministry of Environment and Food of Denmark, 2018). Based on its ‘Resource and Waste
Management Plan 2018’, the City of Copenhagen launched its first circular strategy in 2019
termed ‘Circular Copenhagen: Resource and Waste Management Plan 2024’ (Municipality of
Copenhagen, 2019).
The socio-ecological problems that the Municipality of Copenhagen aims to address with
its CE plan are not explored in detail. Yet, the preface of the plan states that:
“Denmark and Copenhagen are ranked twice as high as the EU average when it
comes to resource consumption per capita. This means that we use enormous
amounts of raw materials and energy to produce a lot of products that end up as
waste far too fast. It also means that in reality, we take more from the Earth than
most people. And it means that we lose resources that we could have used.”
(Municipality of Copenhagen 2019, p5)

179

6

Chapter 6

The municipality acknowledges the issue of over-proportional and unsustainable resource
consumption and, indirectly, the Danish people’s above-average contribution to excess
resource extraction. However, consumption in itself is not regarded as an overarching problem
but rather the fact that consumption waste is not properly cycled back into the economy.
The subtitle to the CE Plan: ‘Resource and Waste Management Plan’, already indicates the
municipality’s strong focus on wastes and resources which becomes also clear in the
municipality’s stated main aim:
“to give the option to all Copenhageners to act in a resource-aware manner,
turning it into a natural everyday habit. The Plan will make it possible to sort your
waste at source (…) [and] to make it easier to choose products that are made
from e.g. recycled resources”
(Municipality of Copenhagen 2019, p5)

Generally, the CE plan does not address issues such as environmental justice, resource
scarcity, or otherwise engages in critical discussions on overconsumption and its implications
for the planet, nature, and human livelihoods. Instead, it focuses on the improvement of
recycling and reuse schemes to foster resource efficiency and reduce CO2 emissions.
The municipality of Copenhagen defines the CE in opposition to the linear economy and
identifies CE as an integral part of its carbon neutrality strategy, stating that:
“materials can circulate for decades and centuries - and thanks to renewable
energy this can happen without emitting more CO2.”
(Municipality of Copenhagen 2019, p6)

6

While decoupling as a concept is not mentioned in the plan, the plan regularly advocates its
contribution to carbon neutrality and the CE’s opportunities for ‘green growth’. Overall, the
plan introduces three measurable targets which include the recycling of 70% of household
and light industrial and commercial waste, the reduction of 59,000 tonnes of CO2, and a
tripling in the number of reused items.
Due to a complete omission of social implications of CE and an optimist approach towards
‘green growth’ with a focus on technological innovation, Copenhagen’s CE plan falls clearly
within the TCE discourse type.
6.4.3.1 Circularity policies
Applying the conceptual framework to Copenhagen’s circular strategy CE (see sections
6.3.3 and 6.3.4) demonstrates that the city takes a rather limited action in all 12 policy
areas (Figure 6.7). The main policy areas addressed by Copenhagen are waste management
(27%), education and knowledge development (27%), and governance and municipal
operations (24%).

180

Sustainable Circular Cities

Te r
rri ba
to n
ria
l

16%

25%

%

20

&
ort
Transpbility
Mo

Soc
ia
Livel Justice &
lihoo
ds

Gre
Buildien
ngs

re
uctu
Str

n&
catio
Eduowledgeent
Kn elopm
Dev

%

16%

15%

&

So
c

cal
iti
ol
-p
io

Go
M ve
Op un rn
er i
a

i
rm nn
Fo Pla

24

Built Envi
ronm
en
t

Econ
Industriomic &
al Po
licy

&
ce l
an ipa ns
c io
t

Sp
at
ia
l
U

re-

& Natu
ems tions
ing
systed Solu
n
o
c
s
E Ba
an
Pl
& ng

27%

w
rg abl
y e

& S
od te
Fo as
W

O
tr rga
ea n
m ic
s

ne e
Re En

Wa

Ma Water
nag
emen
t

ste
&

e
Wast ment
e
Manag

Material Resource F

low

s

FIGURE 6.7 | Policy areas addressed within Copenhagen’s CE plan.

Waste and material resource flows
Overall, Copenhagen’s CE plan has a strong focus on waste management and resource
efficiency. Within waste management and recycling (27%), Copenhagen dedicates 13
policies (out of 28 policies in its entire action plan) to improve the separation, collection,
processing, and recycling of waste. Concerning industrial symbiosis, the municipality
proposes one concrete option for recycling nappies in collaboration with nursery homes,
elderly homes, and other businesses. Overall, the measures show a very limited focus on
industrial ecology and a strong focus on improving recycling schemes. The Municipality
of Copenhagen is also to some extent involved in improving food and organic waste
streams (20%), intending to establish a biogas plant to produce natural gas and fertilizers
to enhance organic waste management structures in the city. The plan does not contain
policies in the areas of water management (0%) and renewable energy (0%).

181

6

Chapter 6

Built environment and spatial planning
In the CE plan, there is a general lack of policies in the built environment and spatial planning.
Only in the policy area of green buildings (16%) are measures proposed. The plan aims to
improve the recycling and reuse of construction materials by assisting developers in the
demolition process and by creating a storage facility for acquiring usable materials that have
recently been recovered from old municipal buildings. Moreover, the municipality plans to
set the reuse of construction materials as a criterion in tender documents. All measures
show a strong focus on recycling and recovering building materials. Copenhagen has no
policy measures in the areas of ecosystems and nature-based solutions (0%), transport
and mobility (0%), and urban form and territorial planning (0%).

6

Socio-political structure
Copenhagen is most strongly committed to policies concerning the socio-political structure.
In terms of social justice and livelihood (15%) policies, the municipality wants to promote
sharing economy activities by aiming to provide and support the establishment of residentoperated repair and workshop facilities. Moreover, Copenhagen Municipality aims to support
the development of swap options. Overall, the initiatives focus more on resource utilization
than on solidarity, yet the local recycling facilities can function as a tool for communitybuilding. In the policy area of governance and municipal operations (24%), Copenhagen
wants to promote public-private partnerships and stakeholder collaboration aiming to
create new solutions to increase the quality of materials circulating within the economy
and to specifically recycle higher-quality plastics. Concerning education and knowledge
development (25%), the city aims to educate Copenhagen’s citizens on recycling and
increase their motivation for sorting. The municipality additionally promotes the labelling
of circular products with information on product repairability and recyclability, however, no
clear implementation scheme exists for this yet. Regarding economic and industrial (16%)
policies, the municipality plans to establish a ‘resource lab’ and an ‘innovation platform’. Both
facilities are geared toward developing new business concepts within the recycling and
resource efficiency sectors (see supplementary materials of Calisto Friant et al., (2022b) for
further details on all the circularity policies established by the city of Copenhagen).
6.4.3.2 Policy-discourse type
Overall, based on the policies proposed within the CE plan, Copenhagen is most strongly
aligned with the TCE discourse (30.52%) and marginally with the RCS discourse (6.25%),
indicating a strong level of optimism about the role of technological innovation in
preventing economic collapse and little to no focus on socio-political concerns (Figure 6.8)

182

Sustainable Circular Cities

Segmented
Technocentric Circular Economy

Optimist

Holistic
Reformist Circular Society

30,52%
6,25%

Skeptical

Technological innovation and ecological
collapse

Approach to social, economic, environmental and governance considerations

Fortress Circular Economy

Transformational Circular Society

FIGURE 6.8 | Presence of the four circularity discourse types in Copenhagen.

6.5

Discussion

6.5.1 Comparative analysis
Our results demonstrate that RCS and TCE discourses dominate in Amsterdam’s and
Glasgow’s CE policies whereas TCE discourses alone dominate in Copenhagen. They also
show that our case studies have overwhelmingly focused on policies related to economic
and industrial policy, governance, waste management, green buildings, food, and education,
while other policy areas were seldomly addressed such as ecosystems, social justice, and
urban form and territorial planning (Figure 6.9).
Our findings for Amsterdam are largely in line with those of previous research in the area.
For instance, Maldini (2021), found that, while Amsterdam Circular 2020-2025 Strategy’s
discourse is quite holistic and progressive, its implementation is “incipient and limited” as
it does not include any explicit measures and targets to reduce citizens’ overconsumption
in a socially equitable manner. Cramer (2020a, 2020b) analysed Amsterdam’s previous
CE programme (implemented from 2015 to 2019), concluding that it only brings about
preliminary progress towards CE as it fails to challenge sector behaviours or product chains.
Savini (2021a, 2019) looked at the Amsterdam city-region’s waste markets from 2000 to 2019
finding that Amsterdam promotes a contradictory approach to the CE where attempts to
reduce consumption are undermined by the expansion of waste recovery infrastructures
that necessitate constant inputs of waste. Campbell-Johnston et al., (2019) and Fratini et al.
(2019) also have similar results regarding Amsterdam’s previous CE strategy, finding that the
discursive depiction of the CE as a transformative social strategy is not mirrored in actual
policies which continue to prioritise end-of-pipe value retention strategies (e.g., recycling).
183

6

Chapter 6

Econ
Industriomic &
al Po
licy

90

& ing
rm nn
Fo Pla

80

Te r
rri ba
to n
ria
l

&

atures&N
stemSolutions
y
s
d
EcoBase

Go
M ve
Op un rn
er i
a

So
c

70
60

re
uctu
Str

50

n&
catio
Eduowledgeent
Kn elopm
Dev

40

Gre
Buildien
ngs

cal
iti
ol
-p
io

Built Envi
ronm
en
t

ing
nn
a
Pl

&
ce l
an ipa ns
c io
t

Sp
at
ia
l
U

All the above research on Amsterdam strengthens our results, which also revealed that
Amsterdam’s discourse on CE is rather holistic on paper but lacks more transformative social
actions that go beyond its focus on economic growth and competitiveness.

30
20

&
ort
Transpbility
Mo

Soc
ia
Livel Justice &
lihoo
ds

10

w
rg abl
y e

& S
od te
Fo as
W

O
tr rga
ea n
m ic
s

ne e
Re En

Wa

Ma Water
nag
emen
t

ste
&

e
Wast ment
e
Manag

s
low
Material Resource F

Amsterdam
Glasgow
Copenhagen

FIGURE 6.9 | Comparative visualisation of the policy areas addressed in the three cities’ CE strategies.

6

Compared to Amsterdam, there is still little scientific literature published on Glasgow’s
and Copenhagen’s CE strategies. Prendeville et al. (2018) have analyzed the previous 2016
‘Circular Glasgow’ strategy, finding that the city took a rather contradictory approach by being
business-centric in its policies while simultaneously offering the possibilities of “being really
radical” in its vision of social justice and ecological transformation (p.186). This aligns with our
analysis of the 2020 route map, which strongly criticised the impacts of neoliberal capitalism,
yet sought market-based innovations and green growth as a solution to those problems.
Krähmer (2021) analyzed Copenhagen’s climate, and sustainability plans and strategies
published between 2012 and 2016. His analysis of those older sustainability policies
evidenced that eco-economic decoupling also played a central role, assuming that it
will enhance growth while reducing carbon emissions (Krähmer, 2021). This shows that
Copenhagen has been following a technocentric “green growth” approach for some time
now, which, as our research revealed, is just reiterated in its latest CE policies.

184

Sustainable Circular Cities

6.5.2 Technological optimism and the limits to growth
Amsterdam, Copenhagen and Glasgow pursue economic growth as a positive societal
goal and objective. All cities thereby assume that, with the transition to a CE, economic
growth can be decoupled from environmental degradation. This is reflective of our case
study’s alignment to the optimist RCS and TCE discourse types. However, the assumption
that eco-economic decoupling is possible is problematic as decades of scientific literature
have found that absolute decoupling is, in fact, impossible and incompatible with wider
circularity and climate ambitions (Haberl et al., 2017; Hickel and Kallis, 2019; Jackson, 2016;
Parrique et al., 2019; Wiedenhofer et al., 2020). Indeed, economic growth is intrisically tied to
energy and material consumption and recycling and recovery technologies can only supply
a fraction of necessary raw materials in a continuously growing economy (Giampietro, 2019;
Marín-Beltrán et al., 2022; Skene, 2018). By leaving economic growth unquestioned, our
case studies fail to address the origins of the socio-ecological issues they want to deal with
(Genovese and Pansera, 2020; Giampietro and Funtowicz, 2020; Hobson and Lynch, 2016).
Moreover, the economic growth and competitiveness approach chosen by our three case
studies will lead to the development and consolidation of waste management start-ups and
businesses. This can create infrastructural lock-ins and path dependencies whereby a city’s
industry and economy becomes dependent on the continuous outflow of waste (Savini,
2019). In fact, the waste management industry operates on very low margins, so in order to be
competitive, it requires substantial investments in infrastructure as well as an abundant and
steady stream of waste to create economies of scale (Savini, 2021a). The three case studies
in this research could thereby end up depending on continuous resource consumption and
extraction to fuel their new waste management and valorisation industries.
All in all, the growth optimist discourse and policies chosen by Amsterdam, Copenhagen
and Glasgow are deeply problematic from a sustainability point of view. The economic
development of these cities will undoubtedly necessitate large amounts of raw materials
and thereby exacerbate socio-ecological impacts throughout the globe (Marín-Beltrán et
al., 2022; Martinez-Alier, 2021b). To address these issues, public policies should focus on
reducing consumption rather than simply recovering waste (Calisto Friant et al., 2021;
Genovese and Pansera, 2020; Reike et al., 2018a). This can be done by fostering sociocultural change to encourage a transition to more sustainable, slower, and more convivial
ways of life. International market competition, globalized capitalist culture, advertisements,
and competitive education and employment systems create and reinforce materialist,
individualist and consumerist lifestyles (Hickel, 2021; Jackson, 2021; Latouche, 2009).
Research has found that this hypercompetitive and hyperconsumerist culture not only has
adverse impacts on human health, happiness and wellbeing but also on the planet as it
fuels the incessant need for needless material consumption (Büchs and Koch, 2019; Fanning
and O’Neill, 2019; Jackson, 2016; Verma, 2017; Vita et al., 2020). Cities should thus establish
policies that encourage a transformation to healthier and more sustainable ways of life,

185

6

Chapter 6

such as bans and restrictions on advertisements, especially in public areas, establishing
environmental education programs in schools, promoting community ethics through
cultural programmes, and creating community-owned media sources (Haluza-DeLay and
Berezan, 2013; Poland et al., 2019; Sitas, 2020; White, 2008; Zwiers et al., 2020).

6.5.3 Social justice and transformation
Some social policies have been developed by Amsterdam and Glasgow; however, they
have mainly been carried out through a reformist and growth-dependent approach
which limits their transformative potential. Societal concerns are not addressed through
the redistribution of wealth, property, and resources, but rather, through specific social
projects and investments such as the promotion of sharing economies or building retrofits
to reduce energy bills. By not distributing wealth, power, and property away from those that
overshoot their fair share of planetary resources and towards those that undershoot their
fair share, those cities do not fundamentally change unequal societal relations. Instead, they
merely address some of the social externalities of a deeply unequal linear system. Moreover,
by focusing on specific projects rather than deeper redistribution of wealth, these policies
become dependent on future economic growth and development to obtain funding and
resources (Savini, 2021b). This ties social policies to the pursuit of economic growth, which
has negative ecological implications, as we saw in the above section.

6

It is also interesting to note that, while Amsterdam and Glasgow acknowledge their dominant
position as large centres of consumption and capital replication and accumulation in the
Global North; their policies hardly do anything to reduce the impact this has on the Global
South. Their constant need for material and energy resources and their position of power in
the global economy is therefore not addressed with concrete actions. The policies of these
cities thus don’t live up to the socially progressive vision they set for themselves. Amsterdam
is often presented as a pioneer and an example of best practice in the urban CE transition
and Circular Glasgow was a finalist of the Circulars Award of the World Economic Forum
(Cuomo et al., 2020; Maldini, 2021; Williams, 2021). Both cities have thus built up a strong
reputation as CE innovators which further enhances the competitiveness of their CE
business sector while taking limited tangible actions to fundamentally transform their
production and consumption systems.
Nonetheless, it is worth adding that the CE action plans of our case studies are in their
early stages. Some concrete social policies are still being designed and developed through
research activities, pilot projects, and collaborative experiments. In the future, these
projects may lead to stronger actions, than what present policy documents suggest. It is
however rather unlikely that they will take a radically different approach from what we have
evidenced through this research.
To reinforce social justice policies related to CE, these cities could develop stronger actions
to circulate money, power, and wealth throughout the local economy in democratic and

186

Sustainable Circular Cities

redistributive manners. This can be done by creating and fostering non-profit cooperative
production, banking and housing systems (the so-called social and solidarity economy)
and supporting them with sustainable municipal public procurement strategies (Crabtree,
2006; Delgado Ramos, 2015; Escobar, 2019; Korsunsky, 2019; Latouche, 2016; Savini, 2021b;
White, 2008). This approach has been implemented with positive social and environmental
outcomes notably in Preston (UK) and Cleveland (USA) (Manley and Aiken, 2020; McInroy,
2018; Roberts, 2017; Song, 2016; Sutton, 2019). Cooperatives are directly co-owned and
co-managed by workers, communities and/or consumers themselves. They thereby foster
democratic citizen control over the economy and create more resilient, vibrant, and selfsufficient local economies (Alexander, 2015; Bookchin, 1982; Felber, 2015). By supporting
local cooperatives, municipalities can not only maintain wealth and resources within the
local economy, but can also promote and finance ecologically sustainable initiatives such
as repair cafés, tool libraries, community swap centres, community-owned renewable
energy generation, and community-supported organic agriculture (Hobson, 2019; Hobson
and Lynch, 2016; Koretskaya and Feola, 2020; Lekan et al., 2021; Morrow and Davies, 2021).
Moreover, cooperatives enable a redistribution of resources, land, wealth, and knowledge,
from private corporations to local communities thanks to open-source platforms,
community land trusts, local currencies, community banking and other key elements of
cooperative and collective ownership structures (Bengtsson et al., 2018; D’Alisa and Kallis,
2020; Ferreira and von Schönfeld, 2020; Foramitti et al., 2020; Gerber and Gerber, 2017). All
in all, cooperatives can set the foundations for a democratic economy and enable a fairer
distribution of the costs and benefits of a circularity transition.

6.5.4 Participatory democracy
The policies of Glasgow, Amsterdam and Copenhagen lacked substantial participatory
processes and commitments in their CE policies beyond public-private partnerships with
industrial and economic actors. While Amsterdam is the only case study that had a number
of participatory workshops in the development of its CE action plan, these were rather
used as consultation processes as the final decisions regarding CE policies remained in the
hands of the Municipal government. By excluding citizens from meaningfully participating
in the creation of the respective CE strategies, and failing to implement participatory
governance mechanisms more broadly, different viewpoints and perspectives are missed
out on, limiting the government’s ability to identify and explore radically different futures.
Through recognising and exploring the diversity in circularity thinking and visions, a greater
range of policies and ideas can come to the forefront to address the plethora of socioecological challenges that cities face. This democratic diversity and pluralism can not only
lead to more appropriate and effective solutions and policies for each city, but it can also
improve citizens’ commitments to the necessary transformations towards slower and more
sustainable consumption practices.

187

6

Chapter 6

More generally, in Amsterdam, Glasgow and Copenhagen, there is also a lack of discussion
concerning who is controlling and governing the CE transition. For example, who owns
the technologies and innovations that are being created? Who controls the resource and
material flows in the city? What are the implications of these processes? This is problematic
as the transition to a CE, if carried out incorrectly, may reinforce or exacerbate current power
dynamics and inequalities in cities, benefitting some and disadvantaging others (Genovese
and Pansera, 2020; Hobson and Lynch, 2016; Moreau et al., 2017). For example, prosperous
neighbourhoods are more likely to benefit from sustainable projects like green spaces and
infrastructure, while poorer neighbourhoods are more likely to be affected by polluting
activities like waste incineration plants (Dushkova and Haase, 2020; Harvey, 2012; Williams,
2021). Moreover, circular and sustainable initiatives can increase housing prices and lead to
gentrification (Kębłowski et al., 2020). It is therefore important that local governments think
more clearly about how the CE is governed and who would be advantaged or disadvantaged
in the implementation of circular policies or actions. This can be achieved through a myriad
of participatory mechanisms that give citizens not only a voice but actual power over policy
decisions such as participatory budgeting processes, citizen assemblies and deliberative
councils (Bookchin, 1982; Kusumo, 2012; Prendeville et al., 2018; Savini, 2021b; Thomson and
Newman, 2020; Voytenko Palgan et al., 2021). Research on deliberative democracy shows
that these democratic mechanisms not only improve the engagement and empowerment
of citizens in the construction of their city but, also lead to more sustainable and progressive
policies than top-down forms of decision-making (Calisto Friant, 2019; Dryzek et al., 2019;
Fishkin, 2018; Fung and Wright, 2001).

6.5.5 Sustainable post-growth urban planning

6

One key insight from this research is the apparent lack of attention, across all our case
studies, to interventions and policies in the area of urban form and territorial planning.
This is a striking omission since urban planning policies have a huge impact on a city’s
consumption of material resources by determining the use of land through zoning, and
enabling the development of key infrastructure such as roads, highways, train stations,
bridges, metro lines, parking spaces, parks, gardens and avenues (Elmqvist et al., 2021; Folke
et al., 2021; Ness, 2021; Xue, 2014). As these investments will remain for the very long term,
these policies establish important path dependencies and infrastructure lock-ins and will
thereby determine the historical shape and morphology of the city and its overall ecological
footprint (Du Plessis, 2012; Joensuu et al., 2020; Thomson and Newman, 2020).
Urban planning has historically operated as a major engine of economic growth and
development (Ferreira and von Schönfeld, 2020). Within a capitalist context, where cities
must compete for resources and investments, zoning laws have been used to attract private
capital by maximising the profitability and economic value of land (Savini, 2021b). In this quest
for economic growth and competitiveness, cities have commodified and destroyed arable
land and biodiverse ecosystems and have dispossessed and displaced poor communities

188

Sustainable Circular Cities

and vulnerable populations to make space for infrastructure that benefits the interests of
capital such as upscale real estate, malls, shipping warehouses and airports (Ferreira and
von Schönfeld, 2020; Ruiz-Alejos and Prats, 2021; Savini, 2021b; Spanier and Feola, 2022). In
the same manner, zoning, and planning have been used to push unwanted developments
in poor areas, thereby replicating territorial patterns of environmental injustice (Agyeman
and Evans, 2004; Derickson, 2014; Harvey, 2012; Martinez-Alier, 2021a; Shah et al., 2018).
National austerity policies and globalized markets have further intensified this trend in
planning practices as cities depend on limited tax revenues in order to invest in social
and environmental goods and services like parks, public areas, schools and social housing
(Ferreira and von Schönfeld, 2020; Savini, 2021b). There is thus currently a dichotomy in
planning approaches between, on the one hand, the need to be competitive and open
the door for capital to obtain resources necessary for social investments, and, on the other
hand, the environmental injustice, ecological destruction, and social segregation and
gentrification that this causes. Capitalist, growth-based city planning is thereby a constant
process of senseless destruction whereby municipalities compete for resources to create
social and environmental projects by undermining the very social and environmental fabric
of their cities.
Nevertheless, there are other forms of planning, that subordinate economic growth to social
needs and ecological imperatives (Delgado Ramos, 2015; Escobar, 2019; Ferreira and von
Schönfeld, 2020; Ruiz-Alejos and Prats, 2021; Savini, 2021b; Spanier and Feola, 2022). Despite
some strong social and ecological narratives, no city from our case studies embraced these
approaches to break free from the contradictions and injustices brought about by growthfocussed urban planning.
Post-growth and post-capitalist planning policies advocate for the establishment of
consumption limits to ensure scarce planetary resources are equally distributed and
accessible with a logic of equity and sufficiency, that is, “enough for everyone, for-ever”
(Alexander, 2015). This is particularly important in the case of housing, due to its high
ecological footprint and unequal distribution (Christis et al., 2019; Joensuu et al., 2020;
Lehmann, 2013; Spiegelhalter and Arch, 2010). Degrowth and post-growth policies in the
housing sector thereby seek to redistribute unused and under-used buildings to housing
cooperatives and prevent the accumulation of building stock through speculation and
vacancy taxes, limits to housing ownership per capita, banning new single-family housing,
limits to new housing size, rent controls, minimum occupancy rates etc. (Alexander and
Gleeson, 2021; Crabtree, 2006; Krähmer, 2022; Lehtinen, 2018; Marín-Beltrán et al., 2022;
Savini, 2021b; Xue, 2021; Zárate, 2011). By setting ecologically responsible and fair limits,
these policies thereby promote equal access to housing for all within planetary boundaries.
Consumption limits can also be established by protecting and restoring biodiversity through
policies like setting limits to land artificialisation, prohibiting the destruction of arable land,
establishing strict protection of green corridors and belts, creating conservation areas,

189

6

Chapter 6

banning extractive activities, and replacing grey infrastructure with green infrastructure
(by transforming parking lots, roads, and highways into gardens and parks, creating green
roofs and walls, greening public areas etc.) (Dushkova and Haase, 2020; Haluza-DeLay and
Berezan, 2013; Hong et al., 2014; Ruiz-Alejos and Prats, 2021; Savini, 2021b; Wang et al., 2012).
These policies not only improve the health of urban ecosystems but also deliver a plurality
of ecosystem services such as flood protection, heat attenuation, air purification, carbon
sequestration, food production, improved mental and physical wellbeing and connection
with nature etc. (Baffour Awuah and Booth, 2014; Benyus, 2015; Deng et al., 2012; Du Plessis,
2012; Dushkova and Haase, 2020; Schneider et al., 2019; Spiegelhalter and Arch, 2010).
Limits can also be set for transportation and the physical expansion of the city. This can be
done by banning, limiting, or restricting private vehicle access while reducing the need for
transportation altogether by building compact multi-functional neighbourhoods as well as
promoting a variety of alternative green transport options (cycling paths, bike-sharing and
parking, quality public transport, attractive footpaths and sidewalks etc.) (Baffour Awuah
and Booth, 2014; Delgado Ramos, 2015; Prendeville et al., 2018; Spiegelhalter and Arch,
2010). These multi-functional planning policies not only reduce a city’s occupation of land
but also create convivial neighbourhoods where offices, housing, parks, markets, education,
public transport, healthcare, and other key urban infrastructure and services are easily and
quickly accessible for all people (including disabled, elderly, children, women and other
vulnerable or marginalized groups) (Baffour Awuah and Booth, 2014; Carrière et al., 2020;
Crabtree, 2006; Hirwani and Vaiya, 2020; Hong et al., 2014; Krähmer, 2022; Kusumo, 2012;
Spiegelhalter and Arch, 2010; Thomson and Newman, 2016; Xue, 2014).

6.5.6 Policy recommendation

6

The policy recommendations developed and presented in this chapter are resumed
in Table 6.8. These recommendations are based on the most socially and ecologically
impactful actions mentioned in the literature we reviewed which, despite their importance
for sustainability and circularity, were missing from our selected case studies. These
recommendations are therefore developed as complements to the current CE policies
and actions at the city level. Moreover, they should not be implemented by themselves,
but rather as a set of actions, that must first and foremost, be developed with the direct
and active participation of local citizens through democratic and deliberative mechanisms.
While these recommendations were built based on our analysis of three European cities,
they might be relevant for other cities in the global north and south alike if they are
democratically adapted and contextualized.

190

Sustainable Circular Cities
TABLE 6.8 | Summary of Policy Recommendations.
Section where
it is discussed
Fostering a socio-cultural transformation away from capitalist hyperconsumerism and
hypercompetitiveness and towards slower, healthier, and more convivial ways of life through
community-owned media sources, restrictions on advertisements, environmental education
and promotion of non-materialist values and community ethics.

6.5.2

Circulating money, wealth, knowledge, and power throughout the local economy in
democratic and redistributive manners by creating and supporting non-profit cooperative
production, banking, and housing systems (of the social and solidarity economy).

6.5.3

Establishing and facilitating participatory mechanisms for the development, governance, and
implementation of CE policies (such as participatory budgeting processes, citizen assemblies
and deliberative councils).

6.5.4

Implement post-growth urban planning approaches by creating compact multi-functional
neighbourhoods (with easy and quick access to urban infrastructure and services), by
redistributing and preventing the unfair and unsustainable accumulation of housing stock,
and by conserving and restoring biodiversity.

6.5.5

6.6

Conclusions and reflections

In answering the research question posed by this chapter, we first developed a framework
to critically analyse the CE policies of different cities. This framework proved to be a useful
tool to objectively and systematically analyse each city’s CE strategy. Indeed, the framework
identified a wide range and variety of circular city policies that are possible, and our case
study’s commitments to those policies.
When applying this framework, we found that the CE policies of Amsterdam, Glasgow, and
Copenhagen, are currently dominated by technological optimist discourses and policies,
which seek economic growth through eco-economic decoupling. We have evidenced the
key limits of this approach based on academic research on the topic and conclude that
it could lead to more social and environmental impacts than benefits. While some social
justice discourses are established by Amsterdam and Glasgow, these visions do not lead to
sufficiently transformative policies and actions. We propose 4 policy recommendations to
overcome the limitations we saw in the CE policies implemented by our case studies and
help towards the construction of sustainable circular cities (see Table 6.8).
In the future, the framework we developed in this chapter could be used by practitioners
and academics alike seeking to assess their city’s CE policies and develop further
recommendations in the policy areas where they find CE actions are most lacking and most
needed. Indeed, by providing a plural and diverse list of possible circularity policies the
framework could be used as a reflection and planning tool for academics and practitioners
seeking to understand the broad range of possible CE policies and to choose and adapt

191

6

Chapter 6

those which they find most relevant for their socio-ecological context. It can also be used
as an education and facilitation tool for participatory planning and policy development
workshops with citizens to help raise awareness and understanding regarding the diversity
of CE policies and visions that are possible. Finally, it can be used for transdisciplinary research
practices with societal stakeholders involved in urban CE development and planning. In any
future use of the framework, we highly encourage its continuous improvement, adaptation,
and expansion to reflect local contexts and new policies in the area. The framework is best
used and understood as an open contribution to the academic debate and the practice of
sustainable and circular urban planning.
It is also worth discussing some of the limitations regarding the research methods and
results. First, we only looked at 3 case studies of wealthy cities in Europe. While this choice
emanated from our case study selection criteria, this has obvious limitations in terms of
the replicability of the framework and the recommendations we have provided. Further
research in other cities with different social, economic, and cultural contexts would thus be
necessary. It is particularly important for future research to focus on less researched case
studies in the Global South. After all, that is where most of the urbanization is going to
happen in the future, as it is estimated that urban population growth in the Global South
will require the construction of built infrastructure to provide the basic needs of 1 million
people every 5 days until 2050 (this is the equivalent of building 10 cities the size of Hong
Kong every year) (Thomson and Newman, 2020). While the academic literature reviewed
to develop the framework included publications and case studies from the Global South,
the framework itself was not tested for validity in cities in that context. This is a promising
avenue for future research not only to better understand urban CE policy implementation in
the Global South but also to adapt and improve the framework for those cities and regions.

6

Second, it is worth mentioning that some social justice, energy, transport or planning policies
of the analysed cities might be established in other non-CE-related policies or plans which
we did not assess here. Our focus was to analyse how our case studies understood and led
the transition to a CE through their policies and their discourse. It is therefore important to
look only at documents relating specifically to their CE policies to evidence what they found
important for this transition rather than in other policy documents aimed at other social or
ecological goals. In future research, other policy plans and strategies, that are not explicitly
on CE could also be included in the analysis, but it should be kept in mind that this analysis
will not be capable of reflecting a city’s discourse and vision of CE.
Third, one might question the feasibility of our recommendations as they might need a
transformation of an entire national economy beyond the city scale. Indeed, while cities
offer unique opportunities for social innovation and transformation, they are also limited by
the structural conditions of the capitalist system in which they are embedded. Post-growth
and post-capitalist planning approaches might try to promote socio-cultural change, yet
if systemic conditions push for increased consumption and production and unsustainable

192

Sustainable Circular Cities

materialist lifestyles, then cities might have a limited scope of impact. Nonetheless, the fact
that alternative policies might be hard to implement is only secondary to the fact that,
considering the current socio-ecological impacts of growth-based capitalist planning, an
alternative is urgently needed, and it must be implemented as quickly as possible (IPCC,
2022). Moreover, research shows that such approaches have had positive impacts in some
cities such as Preston and Cleveland (Manley and Aiken, 2020; McInroy, 2018; Roberts, 2017;
Song, 2016; Sutton, 2019). Finally, the democratic development of these policies is what
matters most. When brought to deliberate and decide on sustainability policies in a fair,
informed and democratic manner, citizens tend to choose much more radical approaches
than politicians and government officials (Fishkin, 2018; Fung and Wright, 2001). There is
therefore a realistic possibility that post-growth city planning policies could be brought
about through democratic innovations like participatory budgeting and deliberative
assemblies.
All in all, it is quite positive to find that some cities like Amsterdam and Glasgow are
embracing more holistic versions of circularity and are starting to question the impact of
their economic models beyond their borders. On the other hand, it is rather disappointing
to find that their implementation remains limited and leaves much to be desired. This
dichotomy between discourses and policy actions could be explained by the complexities
of creating political support for more transformative policies. Decision-makers might be
forced to make political compromises that dilute radical and transformative policies to
secure their political acceptance and prevent outright opposition by more conservative
municipal stakeholders. As academics, we must point out these inconsistencies and
propose alternative policies that address the limitations of current policy approaches. This is
precisely what we have sought to do with the policy recommendations we have developed
in the discussion section. However, more research is still needed on the topic to help cities
transition to fair and sustainable circular societies. Future research should examine the CE
policies of other cities, especially in less researched case studies, and in the Global South.
Future research should also further develop policy actions and recommendations to help
city planners and practitioners create convivial post-growth cities that place social needs
and ecological imperatives above economic growth and capital accumulation. We hope
the policy framework suggested in this chapter could help academics seeking to analyse
city-level CE policies, and practitioners seeking to develop their CE policies and needing a
diverse list of possible actions.

193

6

Chapter 7
Conclusions

“The means for tearing down the old are available, both as hope and as peril. So, too, are the means for rebuilding.
The ruins themselves are mines for recycling the wastes of an immensely perishable world into the structural
materials of one that is free as well as new.” (Bookchin, 1982, p.347)

Chapter 7

7.1

Summary of key results and insights

This thesis started by posing the following question: What are the main societal discourses
and policies on the CE, how can they be critically analysed, compared, and understood, and
what are their sustainability implications? To answer it, this thesis developed a typology
of circularity discourses that served as a conceptual framework to critically analyse,
compare, and understand different circular discourses and policies (chapter 2). It then
analysed circularity policies and discourses at the international level (chapter 4 on the EU),
at the national level (chapter 3 and 5 respectively on tyres and plastic packaging in the
Netherlands) and at the city level (chapter 6 on Amsterdam, Glasgow, Copenhagen).

7

The typology developed in chapter 2, contributes to a better understanding of the large
diversity of academic and conceptual approaches to circularity. It divides circularity
discourses based on two broad criteria. First, whether they are optimist or sceptical regarding
the possibility that economic growth can be decoupled from environmental degradation
fast enough to prevent a socio-ecological collapse. Second, whether they are holistic by
including social justice and political empowerment considerations or whether they are
segmented by focusing on material efficiency alone. This differentiation leads to 4 broad
circular discourse types: Technocentric Circular Economy (optimist and segmented), Reformist
Circular Society (optimist and holistic), Transformational Circular Society (sceptical and holistic),
and Fortress Circular Economy (sceptical and segmented) (see Figure 7.1). Chapter 2 found that
84% of 120 definitions of CE it reviewed fall in the Technocentric Circular Economy discourse
type, while most of the 72 CE-related concepts it reviewed from the historical academic
literature fall either into Transformational Circular Society (42% of reviewed concepts)
or in Reformist Circular Society (28% of reviewed concepts, see chapter 2 for details). The
analysis hence highlights a divergence between the large diversity of holistic and sceptical
approaches to circularity in the academic literature and the narrow focus on Technocentric
Circular Economy discourses in the current discussions and definitions of the topic. A more
inclusive, democratic, and diverse debate on CE is hence lacking and this lack of pluralism
leads to a dominance of circularity discourses and practices that fail to address the seven
key cycles presented in the introduction. Indeed, this thesis finds that only resource cycles and to some extent biogeochemical and ecosystem cycles - are included in the mainstream
CE debate, while cycles of power, wealth, care and knowledge are largely absent. All in all,
chapter 2, seeks to help societal actors see the CE beyond the singular techno-optimist
discourse on the concept. It thereby hopes to foster a cross-pollination of ideas, policy
options, strategies, practices, and solutions from a plurality of different circularity visions and
perspectives. Figure 7.1 below presents an artistic representation of each of the 4 discourse
types developed in chapter 2. The image details the type of future and socio-economic
system that each circularity discourse represents, with the mix of agricultural, industrial,
housing, energy, consumption, and transport systems they would engender. It can help
visualise the full picture and diversity of circularity discourses that exist, with their key

196

Conclusion

differences and commonalities. It can also help imagine a plurality of solutions, practices
and policies that can be developed within different circularity approaches. Finally, it can
help define democratic agreements and common visions regarding the shape and type of
circularity transition that people can aspire to co-design and co-create.

FIGURE 7.1 |Visual representation of the circularity discourse typology.

Findings from the analysis of CE policies and practices in the Dutch end-of-life passenger car
tyre management system demonstrate that it relies heavily on an EPR system that gives a lot
of leeway to the private sector regarding how tyres are recovered and processed (chapter
3). Despite achieving world-leading collection and recovery rates and zero-landfilling, the
EPR system focuses mostly on end-of-pipe solutions, especially recycling (R7), rather than
refusing (R0), and reducing (R1) tyre usage or increasing their lifespan. Tyre consumption
has hence increased by about 20% from 2004 to 2017. Moreover, there is a lot of uncertainty
regarding the final whereabouts of a large proportion of end-of-life tyres, as about 33% of

197

7

Chapter 7

them are exported for re-treading or reuse. Yet there is little information on where exactly
they are sent or whether they will be processed in a sustainable manner once they reach
their end-of-life in those countries. Research has shown that these wastes can end up
in the Global South in countries that often have limited technical and/or administrative
capacities to ensure high social and environmental standards in the collection and recovery
of waste (Bishop et al., 2020; Thapa et al., 2022a). Results from chapter 3 thus reveal that
the underlying discourse and policy approach for end-of-life passenger car tyres is based
on a Technocentric Circular Economy vision, which does not address key social cycles, and
focuses on technological solutions (especially R7) rather than reducing the consumption
of tyres (R0). To address these issues, chapter 3 suggests several alternative policies such as
working with producers to improve the durability and lifespan of tyres (R1) and reducing
the need for car tyres by improving public transport, cycling and pedestrian infrastructure
and discouraging private vehicle use (R0). Including civil society organizations in the
governance of the EPR system in a democratic manner could also improve the attention to
social and ecological considerations in its decisions and actions.

7

Chapter 4 zooms out to the European scale by analysing the CE policies of the Junker
Commission (2014-2019). Results show that the discourse of the EU is rather holistic and
includes various social justice and public participation considerations. However, the policies
the EU enacted are focused on technocentric solutions such as recycling and eco-design.
The EU’s discourse thereby fell in the Reformist Circular Society discourse type as it addresses
some of the key cycles of power, knowledge, wealth, and ecosystems discussed in chapter
1. Yet, its policies focused on resource efficiency from a technocentric perspective, as they
did not include actions on social justice, climate change or biodiversity and they did not
seek to reduce the EU’s overall resource use or ecological footprint. The EU policies of
the Junker Commission are hence in the Technocentric Circular Economy discourse type.
Chapter 4 concludes that a more democratic and plural debate on the CE at the EU level,
which includes a diverse set of circularity discourses and stakeholders, could strengthen
EU policies on circularity. Chapter 4 thus suggests improving the participatory nature of
decision-making at the EU level. It also suggests 32 alternative policy options from a plurality
of different circularity discourses, that could reinforce the weaknesses of the EU’s current CE
strategy. These policies include actions such as reducing working hours; promoting opensource innovations; increasing product guarantee periods; promoting healthy plant-based
diets; and increasing financing and technology transfer to the Global South for climate
change, biodiversity, and circularity projects.
The findings of chapter 5, which analysed the discourse and policies for the transition to
a circular plastics economy in the Netherlands, are very much aligned with the findings of
chapter 3 on tyres. Results show that the Netherlands’ end-of-life plastic management is
also based on an EPR system, which focuses on technological solutions and innovations
such as recycling (R7) rather than reducing the consumption of plastics in the first place
(R0-2). Moreover, chapter 5 also found, that despite having world-leading plastic recycling
198

Conclusion

rates (57% in 2019), the Netherlands relies on the export of plastic waste to the Global South
to achieve its recovery targets. There is thus a Technocentric Circular Economy approach
to plastic in Dutch policies and practices that does not address key social cycles of care,
wealth, power, and knowledge. To address these issues, chapter 5 suggests a broad range of
policy recommendations such as a) reducing plastic consumption by encouraging reusable
packaging, b) taxing raw materials and reducing taxes on recycled or reused materials, c)
providing financial and technical assistance to improve the recovery infrastructure in
the Global South and fund clean-up activities, and d) establishing eco-modulated EPR
fees calculated based on the socio-ecological impact of products and their packaging.
Chapter 5 also encourages more systemic solutions to reduce the demand for unnecessary
consumption and support local value chains and food networks.
Finally, chapter 6 zooms into the local scale by analysing the circularity policies of three
European cities at the forefront of the CE transition: Amsterdam, Glasgow, and Copenhagen.
Results show that all three cities have a growth optimist approach to circularity, which
focuses primarily on technological innovation and resource efficiency to improve
economic competitiveness and develop local recovery industries. Results also demonstrate
that Amsterdam and Glasgow have a holistic discourse regarding social justice and even
acknowledge the significant social and environmental impacts of their high consumption
levels on the Global South. However, the policies taken to address social issues leave much
to be desired as they remain at an explorative stage and mainly consist of small pilot
programs or research projects to support sharing economy initiatives, community repair
networks and urban agriculture projects. The discourse and policies of Amsterdam and
Glasgow can hence be placed in the Reformist Circular Society type, as they include some
social considerations, while the policies and discourses of Copenhagen are clearly within
the Technocentric Circular Economy discourse type as they focus exclusively on economic
competitiveness and resource efficiency. To address the limitations of these policies and
build more inclusive, diverse, and democratic circular cities, chapter 6 suggests various
policy actions. To better redistribute power, wealth, care, and knowledge cycles the
chapter proposes encouraging the redistribution of unused building stock (e.g. through
speculation and vacancy taxes) and promoting non-profit cooperatives (e.g. through
public procurement practices). To overcome the growth paradigm in planning, the chapter
suggests policies that create compact multi-functional neighbourhoods and reduce the
need for motorised transport, as well as policies that conserve and restore biodiversity.
Finally, the chapter encourages democratizing decision-making processes through various
mechanisms such as participatory budgeting processes and deliberative assemblies that
can determine the course of the circularity transition in an inclusive manner.
The results from all chapters of this thesis demonstrate that growth optimist discourses
currently dominate the policy debate on circularity despite the plurality of alternatives that
exist. These results are very much in line with the research of other academics analysing
dominant CE discourses, perspectives and approaches in governments and businesses
199

7

Chapter 7

(Diaz et al., 2021; Klein et al., 2021; Newsholme et al., 2022; Pollex and Lenschow, 2018; Roos
Lindgreen et al., 2020; Santa-Maria et al., 2021b; Simoens and Leipold, 2021; Stumpf et al.,
2021; Völker et al., 2020; Walker et al., 2021, 2022). Further research could examine local
perceptions and citizen opinions on CE to contrast the dominance of Technocentric Circular
Economy discourses in the public and private sector with the kind of circular discourse most
citizens would actually prefer55.
Two recent surveys in France suggest that most citizens would seem to prefer a
Transformational Circular Society discourse type. The first survey by Odoxa found that, to
address current socio-ecological challenges, over 54% of respondents think it is more
important to fundamentally transform our ways of life and reduce consumption levels
than to invest massively in green technologies and innovations (Odoxa, 2019). The second
survey by the Observatory of Utopic Perspectives found that 54.6 % of respondents prefer a
sufficiency-oriented and inclusive ecological utopia rather than a growth and technologyoriented neoliberal utopia (15.9%) or a conservative traditionalist utopia (29.5%) (Observatory
of Utopic Perspectives, 2019).
These results suggest that the Technocentric Circular Economy discourse, which dominates
the current debate on circularity, does not necessarily align with what citizens would prefer
when they are asked to think of a circular future. While these surveys only cover a specific
country, many other studies find that, when citizens openly and freely deliberate in a wellinformed, inclusive, and democratic environment, they tend to make significantly more
sustainable decisions than politicians (Cabannes, 2018; Calisto Friant, 2019; Dryzek et al.,
2019; Fishkin, 2018). Research even finds that, in a democratic context, citizens choose to
forgo personal gains for the benefit of future generations (Hauser et al., 2014). More research
is needed to gain a better picture of what CE discourses people find most appealing and
what CE policies they would choose in a democratic context. Indeed, a more diverse,
democratic, and inclusive construction of a circular future is needed to better include the
plurality of citizens’ discourses and perspectives on CE. A deliberative governance process
that hands decision-making power to citizens could better address the key social cycles of
care, knowledge, wealth, and power and help towards the construction of CE policies that
subordinate economic growth to real resource limits and planetary boundaries.

7

7.2

Strengths and limitations of results and methods

A wide variety of research methods were used throughout this thesis. All chapters took
an interdisciplinary approach with a mix of qualitative and quantitative methodologies.
55 in April 2021 we launched a global survey on circular perceptions. The survey was developed in collaboration
with Revolve Circular and was answered by 1150 people from 77 different countries. The analysis of results was
published in the following report: Calisto Friant, M., W.J.V. Vermeulen, L. Campos Bernal, S. Bauer (2022) How do
you imagine a Circular Economy? Survey Report, Utrecht University & Revolve Circular, https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.7308056

200

Conclusion

Chapter 2 used a critical literature review and participant workshops; chapter 3 is based on
data and policy analysis, as well as stakeholder interviews; chapter 4 is based on quantitative
corpus-based word mining and qualitative policy and discourse analysis; chapter 5 is
based on a mix of media analysis, policy analysis, semi-structured interviews, and surveys
using Q-methodology; and chapter 6 is based on a critical literature review leading to the
development of a circular city policy-discourse framework used to conduct a policy and
discourse analysis. This diversity of methods enabled the thesis to test the typology of
circularity discourses developed in chapter 2 and confirm its relevance with various case
studies and methodological approaches. The consistent results obtained throughout the
chapters reinforce the scientific validity and usefulness of the typology as a conceptual tool
to analyse circular discourses and policies.
The typology has also obtained a good reception by academics and practitioners alike.
The typology article has 210 citations on Google Scholar and 104 citations on Scopus
so far (updated on October 4th 2022) and it has been used in other research such as the
analysis of CE discourses in Norway (Hermann and Pansera, 2020; Ortega Alvarado et al.,
2021), CE discourses in Australia (Melles, 2021), urban living labs in the City of Tampere,
Finland (Särkilahti et al., 2021), and the EU plastics strategy (Palm et al., 2021). In line with the
findings of this thesis, all the above-mentioned papers also found that Technocentric Circular
Economy discourses were dominant in their respective case studies.
Moreover, it is worth mentioning some international organizations, NPOs, and government
institutions that have cited the papers developed in this thesis such as UNEP (United Nations
Environment Programme and United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat),
2021), the Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency and the Netherlands Bureau for
Economic Policy Analysis (Dimitropoulos et al., 2021), the Council of Canadian Academies
(Council of Canadian Academies, 2021), the Purpose Capital Impact Fund (Wilkins and
Murphy, 2021), the German Environmental Agency (Wagner et al., 2022), The European
Commission (European Commission, 2022), and Circle Economy (Circle Economy, 2022).
The uptake of this thesis’s findings by these organisations, operating within and outside
Europe, evidences the societal relevance of this research.
Despite the strength and diversity of the methodological and conceptual approach taken
by this thesis, it also has some limitations. First, policy and discourse analysis have a strong
unavoidable subjective component as they involve qualitative assessment and judgment
by the researchers. To limit this bias, results were always cross-checked with the various
researchers involved in each chapter. Moreover, all chapters combined quantitative and
qualitative tools to strengthen the validity and objectivity of their respective methods. On
the other hand, this mixed-use of qualitative and quantitative methods is rather complex
and time-consuming, which means they could be hard to replicate. Further research on
policy and discourse analysis on sustainability and circularity would be highly beneficial to
cross-check these results with different methods.

201

7

Chapter 7

Much of this thesis is based on the circularity discourse typology developed in chapter 2,
yet as with any other conceptual framework, it provides a simplified view of a complex and
nuanced reality. A continuous improvement of this typology to refine it and expand it with
new concepts and ideas is thus welcome for future research on the topic56. The use and
improvement of the circular city policy-discourse framework developed in chapter 6 is also
highly encouraged for future research. The typology and the framework can best be seen
as an open dialogue on the diversity of circularity thinking and practice to be continuously
updated and improved by scientists and practitioners alike.
Transdisciplinary research methods could be particularly valuable for future research on
circularity discourses and policies. The findings of this thesis have demonstrated the need
for greater inclusivity and pluralism in the development of CE visions, policies, and practices.
Participatory and transdisciplinary methods can address this key challenge especially by
working with societal actors in the co-creation of innovative CE policies, solutions and
approaches (Delgadillo et al., 2021; Santa-Maria et al., 2021a; Thapa et al., 2022b; Vermeulen
and Witjes, 2020). A plurality of views can thus be bridged, and a more democratic and
inclusive circularity transition can be created. Participatory action research approaches,
which empower and give a voice to disenfranchised and vulnerable people57 could be
especially useful in future research projects to better understand the complex socioecological implication of circular policies and projects (Eelderink et al., 2020; Fals-Borda,
1987). These methods could also contribute to a better understanding of what kind of
circular discourse people might prefer and how they would like to get there. In conducting
transdisciplinary research on CE, the circularity discourse typology and the circular city
policy-discourse framework could serve as valuable tools to guide the debate and help
expand the discussions regarding the plurality of circular discourses and policies that exist
(see Figure 7.1 in particular).

7.3

7

Reflections on the sustainability implications of results

Several valuable insights and sustainability implications can be drawn from research results.
This section focuses on two main implications: first, in relation to the dominance of growthoptimist discourses, and second, regarding the dominance of segmented discourses, which
don’t address social cycles (see Figures 2.5 and 7.1).

7.3.1 On the dominance of growth optimist discourses
Results demonstrate that powerful public institutions like the EU and the Municipality of
56 A few additional concepts and ideas were added tot the typology and the respective timeline, which can
be found in the online and interactive version of the timeline: https://cresting.hull.ac.uk/impact/circularitytimeline/
57 PAR and other action research approaches are sometimes called “fairness-driven transdisciplinarity” (see Figure
2.5 in Vermeulen and Witjes, 2020).

202

Conclusion

Copenhagen as well as powerful private institutions like the packaging and tyre industries
in the Netherlands have chosen a technocentric path to circularity. These powerful states
and businesses have led the overall discourse and practice of CE towards policies and
actions, which do not address the social cycles of care, power, knowledge and wealth.
Moreover, when some powerful actors take a more holistic approach to circularity, like the
cities of Amsterdam and Glasgow, they do so in growth-optimist manner, which could lead
to environmental rebound effects. Sceptical CE approaches like Transformational Circular
Society and Fortress Circular Economy, are hence notably absent from policy debates and
practices. The work of Naomi Klein (2014), Georgios Kallis (2019), David Harvey (2012), and
Tim Jackson (2021) has demonstrated that mainstream growth-optimist sustainability
discourses were manufactured and promoted by powerful economic and political elites
to reinforce their interests and safeguard their positions of power. Indeed, the Reformist
Circular Society and Technocentric Circular Economy discourses that dominate the current
debates do not fundamentally challenge present societal structures and systems of power.
Instead of “shrinking and sharing” global resources and wealth to meet global societal needs
within planetary boundaries, these discourses opt for technological solutions that allow the
maintenance of current property relations and divisions of wealth and labour. However,
this ecomodernist path to circularity is problematic from a scientific standpoint, because
the core assumption of this discourse regarding the possibility of decoupling economic
growth from environmental degradation has been clearly rebutted by academic research
on the topic (Haberl et al., 2020; Hickel and Kallis, 2019; Jackson, 2016; Parrique et al., 2019;
Wiedenhofer et al., 2020). Growth optimist circularity discourses and futures could thus
quickly run into fundamental resource constraints as the thermodynamic limitations of
recycling and renewable energy technologies make the actual implementation of these
visions impossible. These discourses might thus be selling a form of “fairy tale” that replicates
an illusion that we could grow the economy forever on a finite planet thanks to perfectly
circular loops of resource recovery and recycling. This is what Giampietro and Funtowicz
(2020) call a “folk tale” that denies the uncomfortable truth regarding the impossibility of
decoupling and the need to move to a post-growth, and therefore, post-capitalist society
to ensure human and planetary wellbeing.
Growth optimist imaginaries of the future might be appealing at first because they
do not require fundamental changes to our ways of life, but they are also scientifically
unrealizable and unjust. Policies that aim for a Reformist or a Technocentric future can thus
end up creating a reality closer to Fortress Circular Economy, as real resource shortages and
ecological boundaries will constrain the realm of possibilities. There is a danger that, as
current socio-ecological problems intensify and climate change impacts worsen, people
could entrench in ethnocentric and xenophobic discourses and policies to protect their
wealth and their access to key resources. Droughts, floods, wildfires, heatwaves, crop
failures, energy restrictions and resource constraints could cause human conflicts, resource
scarcities, economic hardships, and forced migrations that could increase the appeal of

203

7

Chapter 7

Fortress Circular Economy discourses. While this discourse type did not appear in any case
study analysed by this thesis, other researchers have found a rise in eco-fascist and farright ecological discourses in Europe and beyond (Campion, 2021; Hughes et al., 2022; Reid
Ross and Bevensee, 2020; Thomas and Gosink, 2021). Further research of these discourses
and their potential impacts and consequences is necessary. Further research on growth
optimist CE discourses is also needed to draw attention to their biophysical limitations
and socio-ecological implications. Moreover, as Christian Felber (2015) puts it, “there are
plenty of alternatives” to capitalist growth-based imaginaries thanks to a rich history of
social movements and ideas from the Global North and South alike that propose radically
different ways of living and flourishing (e.g. degrowth, buen vivir, ecological swaraj, steadystate economics etc.). Further research, understanding and practice of these alternatives can
help us face the manyfold socio-ecological challenges of the 21st century in a democratic
and inclusive manner.

7.3.2 On the dominance of segmented discourses

7

The findings of this thesis demonstrate that most CE discourses and policies are segmented,
as they don’t address key social cycles. Dominant CE visions thus understand resource flows
and cycles as purely physical processes, which are disembodied and alienated from their
social contexts. Yet resources come from specific places, through particular market structures
and value chains, which are owned by certain institutions and lead to specific conflicts
in the distribution of costs and benefits. Moreover, resources are extracted, transformed,
transported and disposed by people, working under specific circumstances in distinct
countries with key differences in wages, labour rights, occupational health, democratic
structures, cultures, and overall living conditions. Resource cycles are thus inexorably
rooted in social practices and structures, with key geopolitical, social, and economic
dimensions. Within the current global capitalist system, these relations often replicate
structures of injustice and exploitation of humans and nature (Harvey, 2012; Hickel, 2021;
Jackson, 2021). Those on the periphery of the global economy extract natural resources
to supply an endless stream of goods and services (Marín-Beltrán et al., 2022; MartinezAlier, 2021b). This often leads to the destruction of livelihoods, and ecosystems throughout
the globe, for the benefit of a minority of people in the large powerful centres of global
capital accumulation of the Global North58 (Martinez-Alier, 2021b). If the complex social
and biophysical implications of these wealth, power, and resource cycles, are not carefully
examined and understood, then we are bound to replicate relationships of social and
environmental injustice, marginalization, and exploration. Addressing all the seven flows and
cycles mentioned in the introduction can therefore be helpful in comprehensively dealing
with the multiple interrelated socio-ecological crises that our world currently faces. Further
research on these entangled socio-ecological cycles and the manyfold social implications
58 By Global North, we not only mean a geographical representation of the countries of the OECD, but also the
wealthiest economic and political actors in so called “low- and middle-income countries”.

204

Conclusion

of resource and material flows is needed in the future. In that regard, research on the public
policies to transition towards a fair and sustainable circular society that considers all the
seven socio-ecological cycles is particularly important.
Findings, from chapters 3 and 5 evidenced that at least 30% of end-of-life plastics and tyres
from the Netherlands are exported to what Martinez-Alier calls “waste disposal frontiers” in
the Global South (Martinez-Alier, 2021a). Those waste materials are thus “out of sight and out
of mind” for the powerful centres of capital expansion, consumption and accumulation in
Europe (Barnes, 2019). Yet these materials do not cease to exist, they take a new life, serving a
multitude of formal and informal economic actors in the Global South. Unfortunately, research
also suggests that these materials are often recovered, reused, cannibalised, and repurposed
in socially and environmentally harmful ways (Thapa et al., 2022a). While the export of
hazardous waste is highly regulated by international agreements, there is a consistent lack
of enforcement across the world. Wastes from the North thus often become socio-ecological
hazards in the Global South and often end up in places where the recovery infrastructure
is not able to process national waste, let alone foreign waste (Bishop et al., 2020). Yet waste
from the Global North is also a key economic resource for people in the Global South, which
makes it a complex challenge. Global inequality and poverty create conditions whereby waste
is an unwanted discard of consumption for some, all while becoming a valuable economic
resource and a health hazard for others. Further research on the transboundary movement of
waste is necessary to better understand the socio-ecological implications of unequal resource
consumption and waste disposal across the globe.

7.4

Final thoughts: towards a circular society

To conclude, this research demonstrates that CE is neither a novel concept nor a particularly
socially or environmentally relevant one in its current dominant interpretation as it often
fails to address the entangled nature of the seven flows and cycles presented in the
introduction. Most contemporary CE discourses overwhelmingly focus on material and
energy flows, but this is not new as previous ideas, which focus on those flows, have already
been extensively researched and developed, such as industrial ecology, cleaner production,
industrial metabolism, material efficiency etc. (ideas within CE1.0 and 2.0) (Reike et al., 2018a).
The key value and importance of shrinking, slowing, and closing resource loops was indeed
already stressed by academics as far back as the 1970s (Boulding, 1966; Commoner, 1971;
D. Meadows et al., 1972) and it is a key element of the 1992 Rio Declaration on Environment
and Development (UN, 1992). The social implications of circularity and the importance of
social flows and cycles have also been extensively addressed by academics in the field,
which often remind us that circularity must first and foremost contribute to a fairer, healthier
and more convivial society (Arnsperger and Bourg, 2017; Jaeger-Erben et al., 2021; Leipold
et al., 2021; Moreau et al., 2017). Scholars have also argued the need for circularity to take
a systemic perspective that takes biogeochemical cycles, ecosystems, and global resource
205

7

Chapter 7

limits into account, and therefore, goes beyond economic growth and focuses on reducing
the economy’s overall environmental footprint (Bauwens, 2021; Genovese and Pansera,
2020; Schröder et al., 2019b; Suárez-Eiroa et al., 2019).
If the CE is to bring any substantial innovation and contribution to the sustainability debate,
it should take the above points into account. The CE concept could thereby help broaden
our understanding of the various systemic social, material, energy, and biological cycles that
shape human and planetary wellbeing. By highlighting the seven cycles presented in the
introduction this thesis hopes to contribute to this conceptual development of the CE and
improve its social relevance and usefulness for sustainability debates. This thesis particularly
calls attention to the need for a circular economy and society that places planetary limits
and natural cycles above economic growth, that balances cycles of political power in
democratic manners, that redistributes flows of money and wealth in fair and equitable
manners, that maintains the free and open circulation of knowledge and ideas, and that
ensures that care is cycled throughout society in a reciprocal and convivial manner.
To expand our understanding of the topic and improve the current debate this thesis
proposes and develops the idea of a circular society as opposed to a circular economy. As
shown in chapter 2, there is no single concept or vision of a circular society, rather it is
an umbrella concept that includes a wide range of different discourses from the Global
North and South alike (such as buen vivir, degrowth, voluntary simplicity, ecological swaraj
and the like). Moreover, other scholars have proposed the idea of a circular society in their
context and fields, all of which closely align with the idea proposed by this thesis (JaegerErben et al., 2021; Jaeger-Erben and Hofmann, 2020; Leipold et al., 2021). All in all, circular
society discourses are united in their objective to create a democratic, fair and sustainable
socio-ecological system, which works in harmony with the natural cycles of the biosphere
to improve human and planetary wellbeing for current and future generations. A circular
society can operate through various interrelated strategies including, but not limited to, the
following:
•

7
•

Shrinking socio-ecological cycles: reducing the absolute size of flows, through
socio-cultural changes for simpler and more convivial lifestyles as well as design
and technical changes that reduce or substitute materials (often with a “low-tech”
perspective), and thereby shrink the overall societal resource/economic throughput
(Alexander, 2015; Arnsperger and Bourg, 2017; Ashby et al., 2019; Bauwens, 2021;
Bihouix, 2014; Genovese and Pansera, 2020; Kothari et al., 2019; Latouche, 2018; Ness,
2022; Schröder et al., 2019a).
Slowing socio-ecological cycles: maintaining products as long as possible through
product life extension, reusing, leasing, servicing and a focus on functionality, access
and stewardship instead of ownership (Antikainen et al., 2018; Blomsma and Brennan,
2017; Bocken et al., 2016; Delannoy, 2017; Goedkoop et al., 1999; Hobson and Lynch,
2016; Merli et al., 2018; Stahel, 2010).

206

Conclusion

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

Shortening (narrowing) socio-ecological cycles:
repairing, refurbishing,
remanufacturing and repurposing goods following a cascading value retention
hierarchy to prevent resources from becoming wastes (Allwood et al., 2011; Aurez et
al., 2016; Campbell-Johnston et al., 2020b; Delannoy, 2017; Geissdoerfer et al., 2018;
Ghisellini et al., 2016; Milios, 2018; Moreau et al., 2017; Reike et al., 2018a).
Closing socio-ecological cycles: recovering components, materials and embodied
energy through recycling, bio-digestion, composting, urban-mining and, as last resort
options, incineration with energy recovery (Batista et al., 2018; Geisendorf and Pietrulla,
2018; Geissdoerfer et al., 2017; Lorenz et al., 2018; McDonough and Braungart, 2002;
Merli et al., 2018; Prieto-Sandoval et al., 2018; Winans et al., 2017).
Smartening socio-ecological cycles: using eco-innovations for optimum resource
efficiency and the provision of renewable energy such as eco-design for electrification,
durability, multifunctionality, upgradeability, modularity, reusability, repairability, and
recyclability as well as ICT innovations such as P2P platforms, blockchain, smart grids,
and industry 4.0 (de Jesus et al., 2019; den Hollander et al., 2017; Frenken, 2017; GarciaMuiña et al., 2019; Kalmykova et al., 2018; Lüdeke-Freund et al., 2019; Stahel, 2010; Tate
et al., 2019; Zink and Geyer, 2017).
Greening socio-ecological cycles: using safe, organic, and renewable natural
resources and nature-based solutions, while protecting, conserving, regenerating and
restoring ecosystems and biodiversity, through agroecology, permaculture, and effective
environmental protection (D’Amato et al., 2017; Delannoy, 2017; Geisendorf and Pietrulla,
2018; Geiser, 2001; Korhonen et al., 2018a; Murray et al., 2017; Tate et al., 2019).
Democratizing socio-ecological cycles: democratic governance processes to
ensure the equal and meaningful participation of all people in the management of
resources both in the public sector (local, national and international governments)
and in the private sector (enterprises and NGOs) through direct and deliberative
democracy methods such as citizen councils, participatory budgeting, participatory
design, worker syndicates, cooperative ownership etc. (Bookchin, 1971; Ede, 2016;
Felber, 2015; Jackson, 2021; Kerschner et al., 2018; Latouche, 2009; Moreau et al., 2017;
Pansera et al., 2021; Schröder et al., 2020; Velenturf and Purnell, 2021)
Redistributing socio-ecological cycles: ensuring a fair, equal and just distribution
of resources, wealth and power, especially considering the unmet needs of the
most vulnerable citizens of the earth, through progressive taxation, comprehensive
welfare, communal ownership, and open-source knowledge and technologies etc.
(Arnsperger and Bourg, 2017; Ashby et al., 2019; Caillé, 2019; Hobson, 2019; Jackson,
2016; Latouche, 2009; Morrow and Davies, 2021; Piketty, 2019; Schröder et al., 2019a).
Re-localizing socio-ecological cycles: ensuring local autonomy, and sovereignty in
the provision of basic goods and services, promoting local employment and reducing
unnecessary transport costs and industrial delocalization (and thus preventing
competition for low labour and environmental standards) by producing at the closest

207

7

Chapter 7

possible level (Bihouix, 2014; Ede, 2016; Genovese and Pansera, 2020; Hopkins, 2008;
Latouche, 2009; Suárez-Eiroa et al., 2019; Tate et al., 2019; Trainer and Alexander, 2019).
The above description of a circular society and its core components and operating strategies
are best understood as the beginning of an open academic debate on the topic. A debate
that could help scholars and practitioners expand their understanding of circularity
and embrace a plurality of different discourses and ways of implementing the concept.
Although their conceptual underpinnings stretch far back in history, the circular economy
and society concepts are still relatively young and remain to be further developed within
and beyond academia. Therefore, further research and practice of these concepts is highly
encouraged, especially through inter and transdisciplinary approaches that include a wide
range of perspectives and societal actors.

7

208

Additional materials
References
Publications & other materials
Summary
Samenvatting
Acknowledgements
About the author
Research context

Bibliography

Bibliography
Acemoglu, D., Robinson, J., 2012. Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity and Poverty. Crown, New York.
Adhikari, B., De, D., Maiti, S., 2000. Reclamation and recycling of waste rubber. Prog. Polym. Sci. 25, 909–948. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0079-6700(00)00020-4
Advisory Board for CE, 2017. The Advisory Board for Circular Economy Recommendations for the Danish
Government.
Agyeman, J., Evans, B., 2004. “Just sustainability”: the emerging environmental justice in Britain? Geogr. J. 170, 155–
164. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0016-7398.2004.00117.x
Aiello, M.A., Leuzzi, F., Centonze, G., Maffezzoli, A., 2009. Use of steel fibres recovered from waste tyres as
reinforcement in concrete: Pull-out behaviour, compressive and flexural strength. Waste Manag. 29, 1960–
1970. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2008.12.002
Albarillo, F., 2014. Language in Social Science Databases: English Versus Non-English Articles in JSTOR and Scopus.
Behav. Soc. Sci. Libr. 33, 77–90. https://doi.org/10.1080/01639269.2014.904693
Albert, M., 2021. No Bosses: A New Economy for a Better World. Zero Books.
Albert, M.J., 2020. The Dangers of Decoupling: Earth System Crisis and the ‘Fourth Industrial Revolution.’ Glob. Policy
11, 245–254. https://doi.org/10.1111/1758-5899.12791
Alexander, S., 2015. Sufficiency economy: Enough, for Everyone, Forever. Simplicity Institute Publishing, Melbourne,
Australia.
Alexander, S., Gleeson, B., 2021. What if Ivan Illich were elected mayor? Arena Spring, 57–62.
Allen, A.M., Hof, A.R., 2019. Paying the price for the meat we eat. Environ. Sci. Policy 97, 90–94. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.envsci.2019.04.010
Allwood, J.M., Ashby, M.F., Gutowski, T.G., Worrell, E., 2011. Material efficiency: A white paper. Resour. Conserv.
Recycl. 55, 362–381. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2010.11.002
Alston, P., 2019. Climate change and poverty : report of the Special Rapporteur on Extreme Poverty and Human
Rights 21 p.
Amari, T., Themelis, N.J., Wernick, I.K., 1999. Resource recovery from used rubber tires. Resour. Policy 25, 179–188.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0301-4207(99)00025-2
Ampe, K., Paredis, E., Asveld, L., Osseweijer, P., Block, T., 2019. A transition in the Dutch wastewater system? The
struggle between discourses and with lock-ins. J. Environ. Policy Plan. 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1080/15239
08X.2019.1680275
Andra, S.S., Makris, K.C., 2012. Thyroid disrupting chemicals in plastic additives and thyroid health. J. Environ. Sci.
Heal. - Part C Environ. Carcinog. Ecotoxicol. Rev. 30, 107–151. https://doi.org/10.1080/10590501.2012.681487
Antikainen, R., Lazarevic, D., Seppälä, J., 2018. Circular Economy: Origins and Future Orientations, in: Lehmann,
H. (Ed.), Factor X Challenges, Implementation Strategies and Examples for a Sustainable Use of Natural
Resources. pp. 115–129. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-50079-9_7
Arler, F., 2018. Revitalizing Traditional Chinese Concepts in the Modern Ecological Civilization Debate. Open J.
Philos. 08, 102–115. https://doi.org/10.4236/ojpp.2018.82009
Armiero, M., 2021. Wasteocene: Stories from the Global Dump, Elements in Environmental Humanities. Cambridge
University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108920322
Arnsperger, C., Bourg, D., 2017. Écologie intégrale : pour une société permacirculaire. PUF, Paris.
Artaraz, K., Calestani, M., 2015. Suma qamaña in Bolivia: Indigenous understandings of well-being and
their contribution to a post-neoliberal paradigm. Lat. Am. Perspect. 42, 216–233. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0094582X14547501
Arunan, I., Crawford, R.H., 2021. Greenhouse gas emissions associated with food packaging for online food delivery
services in Australia. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 168, 105299. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RESCONREC.2020.105299
Aryes, R.U., 1989. Industrial Metabolism, in: Technology and Environment. pp. 23–49. https://doi.org/10.4018/9781-60566-114-8.ch002
Ashby, A., Callegaro, A.M., Adeyeye, K., Granados, M., 2019. The Spiral Economy: A Socially Progressive Circular
Economy Model? Springer, Cham, pp. 67–94. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-15066-2_5
Audet, R., 2016. Transition as discourse. Int. J. Sustain. Dev. 19, 365–382. https://doi.org/10.1504/ijsd.2016.080512

210

Bibliography
Audier, S., 2019. L’âge productiviste : hégémonie prométhéenne, brèches et alternatives écologiques. La
Découverte, Paris.
Aurez, V., Georgeault, L., Stahel, W.R., Bourg, D., 2016. Économie circulaire : système économique et finitude des
ressources. De Boeck supérieur.
Ayres, R.U., Simonis, U.E., 1994. Industrial metabolism : restructuring for sustainable development. United Nations
University Press, Tokyo, Japan.
Azevedo-Santos, V.M., Brito, M.F.G., Manoel, P.S., Perroca, J.F., Rodrigues-Filho, J.L., Paschoal, L.R.P., Gonçalves, G.R.L.,
Wolf, M.R., Blettler, M.C.M., Andrade, M.C., Nobile, A.B., Lima, F.P., Ruocco, A.M.C., Silva, C. V., Perbiche-Neves, G.,
Portinho, J.L., Giarrizzo, T., Arcifa, M.S., Pelicice, F.M., 2021. Plastic pollution: A focus on freshwater biodiversity.
Ambio 2021 507 50, 1313–1324. https://doi.org/10.1007/S13280-020-01496-5
Baas, L.W., 1995. Cleaner production: beyond projects. J. Clean. Prod. 3, 55–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/09596526(95)00042-D
Baffour Awuah, K.G., Booth, C.A., 2014. Integrated management framework for sustainable cities: Insights into
multiple concepts and principles. WIT Trans. Ecol. Environ. 191, 111–123. https://doi.org/10.2495/SC140101
Banguera, L.A., Sepúlveda, J.M., Ternero, R., Vargas, M., Vásquez, Ó.C., 2018. Reverse logistics network design under
extended producer responsibility: The case of out-of-use tires in the Gran Santiago city of Chile. Int. J. Prod.
Econ. 205, 193–200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2018.09.006
Baran, B., 2020. Plastic waste as a challenge for sustainable development and circularity in the European Union.
Ekon. i Prawo 19, 7. https://doi.org/10.12775/eip.2020.001
Barnes, S.J., 2019. Out of sight, out of mind: Plastic waste exports, psychological distance and consumer plastic
purchasing. Glob. Environ. Chang. 58, 101943. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2019.101943
Barnosky, A.D., Matzke, N., Tomiya, S., Wogan, G.O.U., Swartz, B., Quental, T.B., Marshall, C., McGuire, J.L., Lindsey, E.L.,
Maguire, K.C., Mersey, B., Ferrer, E.A., 2011. Has the Earth’s sixth mass extinction already arrived? Nature 471,
51–57. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09678
Barrière, O., Prost, C., Ravena-Cañete, V., Douzal, V., Fargette, M., Aubin, J.P., 2019. Introductory chapter: An
interweaving to be formalized, the biosphere faced with the relationship between the human and the nonhuman, in: Coviability of Social and Ecological Systems: Reconnecting Mankind to the Biosphere in an Era
of Global Change: The Foundations of a New Paradigm. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 1–38.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-78497-7_1
Barrowclough, D., Birkbeck, C.D., 2020. Transforming the Global Plastics Economy: The Political Economy and
Governance of Plastics Production and Pollution, GEG Working Paper 142.
Barry, J., Proops, J., 1999. Seeking sustainability discourses with Q methodology. Ecol. Econ. 28, 337–345. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0921-8009(98)00053-6
Baruque-Ramos, J., Amaral, M.C., Laktim, M.C., Santos, H.N., Araujo, F.B., Zonatti, W.F., 2017. Social and economic
importance of textile reuse and recycling in Brazil, in: IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and
Engineering. Institute of Physics Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1088/1757-899X/254/19/192003
Bassens, D., Kębłowski, W., Lambert, D., 2020. Placing cities in the circular economy: neoliberal urbanism or spaces
of socio-ecological transition? Urban Geogr. 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1080/02723638.2020.1788312
Batista, L., Bourlakis, M., Smart, P., Maull, R., 2018. In search of a circular supply chain archetype–a content-analysisbased literature review. Prod. Plan. Control 29, 438–451. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2017.1343502
Bauer, F., Fontenit, G., 2021. Plastic dinosaurs – Digging deep into the accelerating carbon lock-in of plastics. Energy
Policy 156, 112418. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENPOL.2021.112418
Bauwens, T., 2021. Are the circular economy and economic growth compatible? A case for post-growth circularity.
Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 175, 105852. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2021.105852
Beling, A.E., Vanhulst, J., Demaria, F., Rabi, V., Carballo, A.E., Pelenc, J., 2018. Discursive Synergies for a ‘Great
Transformation’ Towards Sustainability: Pragmatic Contributions to a Necessary Dialogue Between
Human Development, Degrowth, and Buen Vivir. Ecol. Econ. 144, 304–313. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecolecon.2017.08.025
Bellamy Foster, J., Clark, B., York, R., 2010. The Ecological Rift: Capitalism’s War on the Earth. Monthly Review Press.
Bengtsson, M., Alfredsson, E., Cohen, M., Lorek, S., Schroeder, P., 2018. Transforming systems of consumption and
production for achieving the sustainable development goals: moving beyond efficiency. Sustain. Sci. 13,
1533–1547. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-018-0582-1

211

Bibliography
Benyus, J., 2015. The Generous City. Archit. Des. 85, 120–121. https://doi.org/10.1002/ad.1939
Benyus, J.M., 1998. Biomimicry : innovation inspired by nature. Quill.
Biel, R., 2012. The Entropy of Capitalism (Studies in Critical Social Sciences). Koninklijke Brill, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Biemann, R., Blüher, M., Isermann, B., 2021. Exposure to endocrine-disrupting compounds such as phthalates and
bisphenol A is associated with an increased risk for obesity. Best Pract. Res. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 101546.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BEEM.2021.101546
Bihouix, P., 2014. L’âge des low tech : vers une civilisation techniquement soutenable. Seuil, Paris.
Bishop, G., Styles, D., Lens, P.N.L., 2020. Recycling of European plastic is a pathway for plastic debris in the ocean.
Environ. Int. 142, 105893. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2020.105893
Bleischwitz, R., Miedzinski, M., 2018. The Resource Nexus and Resource Efficiency: What a Nexus Perspective Adds
to the Story, in: Lehmann, H. (Ed.), Factor X Challenges, Implementation Strategies and Examples for a
Sustainable Use of Natural Resources. pp. 199–212. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-50079-9_12
Bleyer, A., Keegan, T., 2018. Incidence of malignant lymphoma in adolescents and young adults in the 58 counties of
California with varying synthetic turf field density. Cancer Epidemiol. 53, 129–136. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
canep.2018.01.010
Blok, R., Smits, J., Gkaidatzis, R., Teuffel, P., 2019. Bio-Based Composite Footbridge: Design, Production and In Situ
Monitoring. Struct. Eng. Int. 29, 453–465. https://doi.org/10.1080/10168664.2019.1608137
Blomsma, F., 2018. Collective ‘action recipes’ in a circular economy – On waste and resource management
frameworks and their role in collective change. J. Clean. Prod. 199, 969–982. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2018.07.145
Blomsma, F., Brennan, G., 2017. The Emergence of Circular Economy: A New Framing Around Prolonging Resource
Productivity. J. Ind. Ecol. 21, 603–614. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12603
Bluemink, E.D., Van Nieuwenhuijzen, A.F., Wypkema, E., Uijterlinde, C.A., 2016. Bio-plastic (poly-hydroxy-alkanoate)
production from municipal sewage sludge in the Netherlands: A technology push or a demand driven
process? Water Sci. Technol. 74, 353–358. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2016.191
Bocken, N.M.P., de Pauw, I., Bakker, C., van der Grinten, B., 2016. Product design and business model strategies for a
circular economy. J. Ind. Prod. Eng. 33, 308–320. https://doi.org/10.1080/21681015.2016.1172124
Boesen, S., Bey, N., Niero, M., 2019. Environmental sustainability of liquid food packaging: Is there a gap between
Danish consumers’ perception and learnings from life cycle assessment? J. Clean. Prod. 210, 1193–1206.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.11.055
Bookchin, M., 1982. The ecology of freedom : the emergence and dissolution of hierarchy. Cheshire Books, Palo
Alto (CA).
Bookchin, M., 1971. Post-scarcity anarchism. Black Rose Books, Montreal and Buffalo.
Borrello, M., Pascucci, S., Cembalo, L., 2020. Three propositions to unify circular economy research: A review. Sustain.
12, 1–22. https://doi.org/10.3390/SU12104069
Boulding, K.E., 1966. The Economics of the Coming Spaceship Earth, in: Jarrett, H. (Ed.), Environmental Quality in a
Growing Economy. Resources for the Future/Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD, pp. 3–14.
Bourg, D., 2018. De l’économie circulaire à l’économie permacirculaire. Ann. des Mines - Responsab. Environ. 89,
30–33.
Boyle, W.C., 1977. Energy Recovery From Sanitary Landfills - A Review, in: The Proceedings of a Seminar Sponsored
by the UN Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR) and the Ministry for Research and Technology of the
Federal Republic of Germany. Göttingen, pp. 119–138.
Brand, U., Muraca, B., Pineault, É., Sahakian, M., Schaffartzik, A., Novy, A., Streissler, C., Haberl, H., Asara, V., Dietz, K.,
Lang, M., Kothari, A., Smith, T., Spash, C., Brad, A., Pichler, M., Plank, C., Velegrakis, G., Jahn, T., Carter, A., Huan,
Q., Kallis, G., Martínez Alier, J., Riva, G., Satgar, V., Teran Mantovani, E., Williams, M., Wissen, M., Görg, C., 2021.
From planetary to societal boundaries: an argument for collectively defined self-limitation. Sustain. Sci. Pract.
Policy 17, 265–292. https://doi.org/10.1080/15487733.2021.1940754
Brooks, A.L., Wang, S., Jambeck, J.R., 2018. The Chinese import ban and its impact on global plastic waste trade. Sci.
Adv. 4, eaat0131. https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIADV.AAT0131
Brophy, J.T., Keith, M.M., Watterson, A., Park, R., Gilbertson, M., Maticka-Tyndale, E., Beck, M., Abu-Zahra, H., Schneider,
K., Reinhartz, A., Dematteo, R., Luginaah, I., 2012. Breast cancer risk in relation to occupations with exposure
to carcinogens and endocrine disruptors: A Canadian case-control study. Environ. Heal. A Glob. Access Sci.
Source 11, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-069X-11-87

212

Bibliography
Brouwer, M., Picuno, C., Thoden van Velzen, E.U., Kuchta, K., De Meester, S., Ragaert, K., 2019. The impact of collection
portfolio expansion on key performance indicators of the Dutch recycling system for Post-Consumer
Plastic Packaging Waste, a comparison between 2014 and 2017. Waste Manag. 100, 112–121. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.wasman.2019.09.012
Brouwer, M.T., Thoden van Velzen, E.U., Augustinus, A., Soethoudt, H., De Meester, S., Ragaert, K., 2018. Predictive
model for the Dutch post-consumer plastic packaging recycling system and implications for the circular
economy. Waste Manag. 71, 62–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.WASMAN.2017.10.034
Brown, S.R., 1993. A Primer on Q Methodology. Operant Subj. 16, 91–138.
Brown, S.R., 1980. Political subjectivity: Applications of Q methodology in political science. Yale University Press.
Bruel, A., Kronenberg, J., Troussier, N., Guillaume, B., 2019. Linking Industrial Ecology and Ecological Economics:
A Theoretical and Empirical Foundation for the Circular Economy. J. Ind. Ecol. 23, 12–21. https://doi.
org/10.1111/jiec.12745
Bryman, A., 2012. Social research methods, Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004
Buchmann-Duck, J., Beazley, K.F., 2020. An urgent call for circular economy advocates to acknowledge its limitations
in conserving biodiversity. Sci. Total Environ. 727, 138602. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.138602
Büchs, M., Koch, M., 2019. Challenges for the degrowth transition: The debate about wellbeing. Futures 105, 155–
165. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2018.09.002
Bucknall, D.G., 2020. Plastics as a materials system in a circular economy. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A 378. https://doi.
org/10.1098/RSTA.2019.0268
Cabannes, Y., 2018. The contribution of participatory budgeting to the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals: lessons for policy in Commonwealth countries. Commonw. J. Local Gov. https://doi.
org/https://doi.org/10.5130/cjlg.v0i21.6707
Caillé, A., 2019. Convivialism, in: Kothari, A., Salleh, A., Escobar, A., Demaria, F., Acosta, A. (Eds.), Pluriverse: A PostDevelopment Dictionary. Tulika Books, New Delhi, India, p. 340.
Caillé, A., 2015. Le convivialisme en dix questions : un nouvel imaginaire politique. Le Bord de l’eau, Paris.
Calisto Friant, M., 2019. Deliberating for sustainability: lessons from the Porto Alegre experiment with participatory
budgeting. Int. J. Urban Sustain. Dev. 11, 81–99. https://doi.org/10.1080/19463138.2019.1570219
Calisto Friant, M., Lakerveld, D., Vermeulen, W.J. V, Salomone, R., 2022a. Transition to a Sustainable Circular Plastics
Economy in The Netherlands : Discourse and Policy Analysis. Sustainability 14, 1–34.
Calisto Friant, M., Langmore, J., 2015. The buen vivir: A policy to survive the anthropocene? Glob. Policy 6, 64–71.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1758-5899.12187
Calisto Friant, M., Reid, K., Boesler, P., Vermeulen, W., Salomone, R., 2022b. Sustainable Circular Cities: Analysing Urban
Circular Economy Policies in Three European Cities. SSRN Electron. J. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4133478
Calisto Friant, M., Vermeulen, W.J.V., Salomone, R., 2021. Analysing European Union circular economy policies: words
versus actions. Sustain. Prod. Consum. 27, 337–353. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2020.11.001
Calisto Friant, M., Vermeulen, W.J.V., Salomone, R., 2020. A typology of circular economy discourses: Navigating
the diverse visions of a contested paradigm. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 161. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
resconrec.2020.104917
Calisto Friant, M., Vermeulen, W.J.V., Salomone, R., 2019. Advancing a critical research agenda on the circular
economy, in: 25th Conference of the International Sustainable Development Research Society (ISDRS) Held
by Nanjing University in Nanjing, China in June 2019. pp. 46–61.
Camilleri, M.A., 2018. The circular economy’s closed loop and product service systems for sustainable development:
A review and appraisal. Sustain. Dev. 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1002/sd.1909
Campbell-Johnston, K., Calisto Friant, M., Thapa, K., Lakerveld, D., Vermeulen, W.J.V., 2020a. How circular is your tyre:
Experiences with extended producer responsibility from a circular economy perspective. J. Clean. Prod. 270,
122042. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.122042
Campbell-Johnston, K., Cate, J. ten, Elfering-Petrovic, M., Gupta, J., 2019. City level circular transitions: Barriers and
limits in Amsterdam, Utrecht and The Hague. J. Clean. Prod. 235, 1232–1239. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2019.06.106
Campbell-Johnston, K., de Munck, M., Vermeulen, W.J.V., Backes, C., 2021. Future perspectives on the role of extended
producer responsibility within a circular economy: A Delphi study using the case of the Netherlands. Bus.
Strateg. Environ. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2856

213

Bibliography
Campbell-Johnston, K., Vermeulen, W.J.V., Reike, D., Brullot, S., 2020b. The Circular Economy and Cascading: Towards
a Framework. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. X. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rcrx.2020.100038
Campion, K., 2021. Defining Ecofascism: Historical Foundations and Contemporary Interpretations in the Extreme
Right. Terror. Polit. Violence 00, 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1080/09546553.2021.1987895
CAN, 2018. European Commission’s draft EU Long Term Strategy and the Paris Agreement.
Capra, F., Jakobsen, O.D., 2017. A conceptual framework for ecological economics based on systemic principles of
life. Int. J. Soc. Econ. 44, 831–844. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSE-05-2016-0136
Carrière, S., Weigend Rodríguez, R., Pey, P., Pomponi, F., Ramakrishna, S., 2020. Circular cities: the case of Singapore.
Built Environ. Proj. Asset Manag. 10, 491–507. https://doi.org/10.1108/BEPAM-12-2019-0137
Castán Broto, V., Allen, A., Rapoport, E., 2012. Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Urban Metabolism. J. Ind. Ecol. 16,
851–861. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-9290.2012.00556.x
Castell, A., Clift, R., Francae, C., 2008. Extended Producer Responsibility Policy in the European Union: A Horse or a
Camel? J. Ind. Ecol. 8, 4–7. https://doi.org/10.1162/1088198041269409
Catton, W.R., 1980. Overshoot : the ecological basis of revolutionary change. University of Illinois Press, Urbana and
Chicago.
Cavanagh, C.J., Benjaminsen, T.A., 2018. Political ecology, variegated green economies, and the foreclosure of
alternative sustainabilities. J. Polit. Ecol. 24, 200. https://doi.org/10.2458/v24i1.20800
Cecchin, A., Lamour, M., Joseph Maks Davis, M., Jácome Polit, D., 2019. End‐of‐life product management as a
resilience driver for developing countries: A policy experiment for used tires in Ecuador. J. Ind. Ecol. 23, 1292–
1310. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12861
Chancel, L., 2021. Climate change and the global inequality of carbon emissions 1990-2020. Paris. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1474-919X.2004.00320.x
Chancel, L., Piketty, T., Saez, E., Zucman, G., 2022. World Inequality Report 2022. Paris.
Chaves Ávila, R., Monzón Campos, J.L., 2018. La economía social ante los paradigmas económicos emergentes:
innovación social, economía colaborativa, economía circular, responsabilidad social empresarial, economía
del bien común, empresa social y economía solidaria. CIRIEC-España, Rev. Econ. pública, Soc. y Coop. 5.
https://doi.org/10.7203/ciriec-e.93.12901
Chertow, M.R., 2000. Industrial symbiosis: Literature and taxonomy. Annu. Rev. Energy Environ. 25, 313–337. https://
doi.org/10.1146/annurev.energy.25.1.313
Christis, M., Athanassiadis, A., Vercalsteren, A., 2019. Implementation at a city level of circular economy strategies
and climate change mitigation – the case of Brussels. J. Clean. Prod. 218, 511–520. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2019.01.180
Circle Economy, 2022. THINKING BEYOND BORDERS TO ACHIEVE SOCIAL JUSTICE IN A GLOBAL CIRCULAR
ECONOMY. Amsterdam.
Clauzade, C., Osset, P., Hugrel, C., Chappert, A., Durande, M., Palluau, M., 2010. Life cycle assessment of nine recovery
methods for end-of-life tyres. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 15, 883–892. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11367-010-0224-z
Clift, R., Baumann, H., Murphy, R., Stahel, W., 2019. Managing plastics: uses, losses and disposal. Law, Environ. Dev.
J. 15, 95–107.
Clube, R.K.M., Tennant, M., 2020. The Circular Economy and human needs satisfaction: Promising the radical,
delivering the familiar. Ecol. Econ. 177, 106772. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2020.106772
Coelho, P.M., Corona, B., ten Klooster, R., Worrell, E., 2020. Sustainability of reusable packaging–Current situation and
trends. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. X 6, 100037. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rcrx.2020.100037
Colombo, L.A., Pansera, M., Owen, R., 2019. The discourse of eco-innovation in the European Union: An analysis of
the Eco-Innovation Action Plan and Horizon 2020. J. Clean. Prod. 214, 653–665. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2018.12.150
Commoner, B., 1971. The closing circle: nature, man, and technology. Bantam Books, New York.
Corona, B., Shen, L., Reike, D., Rosales Carreón, J., Worrell, E., 2019. Towards sustainable development through the
circular economy—A review and critical assessment on current circularity metrics. Resour. Conserv. Recycl.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.104498
Corti, A., Lombardi, L., 2004. End life tyres: Alternative final disposal processes compared by LCA, in: Energy. pp.
2089–2108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2004.03.014

214

Bibliography
Corvellec, H., Böhm, S., Stowell, A., Valenzuela, F., 2020. Introduction to the special issue on the contested realities of
the circular economy. Cult. Organ. 26, 97–102. https://doi.org/10.1080/14759551.2020.1717733
Cosme, I., Santos, R., O’Neill, D.W., 2017. Assessing the degrowth discourse: A review and analysis of academic
degrowth policy proposals. J. Clean. Prod. 149, 321–334. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.02.016
Côté, R.P., Cohen-Rosenthal, E., 1998. Designing eco-industrial parks: A synthesis of some experiences. J. Clean. Prod.
6, 181–188. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-6526(98)00029-8
Council of Canadian Academies, 2021. Turning Point, The Expert Panel on the Circular Economy in Canada. Ottawa
(ON).
Crabtree, L., 2006. Disintegrated houses: Exploring ecofeminist housing and urban design options. Antipode 38,
711–734. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2006.00473.x
Cramer, J., 2018. Key drivers for high-grade recycling under constrained conditions. Recycling 3, 16. https://doi.
org/10.3390/recycling3020016
Cramer, J.M., 2020a. Implementing the circular economy in the Amsterdam Metropolitan Area: The interplay
between market actors mediated by transition brokers. Bus. Strateg. Environ. 29, 2857–2870. https://doi.
org/10.1002/bse.2548
Cramer, J.M., 2020b. Practice-based model for implementing circular economy: The case of the Amsterdam
Metropolitan Area. J. Clean. Prod. 255. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.120255
Cullen, J.M., 2017. Circular Economy: Theoretical Benchmark or Perpetual Motion Machine? J. Ind. Ecol. 21, 483–486.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12599
Cuomo, F., Ravazzi, S., Savini, F., Bertolini, L., 2020. Transformative urban living labs: Towards a circular economy in
Amsterdam and Turin. Sustain. 12, 7651. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12187651
Curry, R., Barry, J., McClenaghan, A., 2013. Northern Visions? Applying Q methodology to understand stakeholder
views on the environmental and resource dimensions of sustainability. J. Environ. Plan. Manag. 56, 624–649.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09640568.2012.693453
D’Alisa, G., Demaria, F., Kallis, G., 2014. Degrowth : a vocabulary for a new era. Routledge, London.
D’Alisa, G., Kallis, G., 2020. Degrowth and the State. Ecol. Econ. 169. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2019.106486
D’Amato, D., Droste, N., Allen, B., Kettunen, M., Lähtinen, K., Korhonen, J., Leskinen, P., Matthies, B.D., Toppinen, A.,
2017. Green, circular, bio economy: A comparative analysis of sustainability avenues. J. Clean. Prod. 168,
716–734. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.09.053
D’Amato, D., Droste, N., Winkler, K.J., Toppinen, A., 2019. Thinking green, circular or bio: Eliciting researchers’
perspectives on a sustainable economy with Q method. J. Clean. Prod. 230, 460–476. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.05.099
Daly, H.E., 1996. Beyond growth : the economics of sustainable development. Beacon Press, Boston (MA).
Daly, H.E., 1977. Steady-state economics. W.H. Freeman, San Francisco.
Dansk Erhverv, n.d. Danmark et et servicesamfund [WWW Document]. URL https://www.danskerhverv.dk/
dataunivers/servicesektor/ (accessed 3.15.22).
Darbre, P.D., 2020. Chemical components of plastics as endocrine disruptors: Overview and commentary. Birth
Defects Res. 112, 1300–1307. https://doi.org/10.1002/bdr2.1778
Davis, G., Wilt, C., 1994. Extended producer responsibility: A new principle for a new generation of pollution
prevention. Knoxville, TN.
de Jesus, A., Antunes, P., Santos, R., Mendonça, S., 2019. Eco-innovation pathways to a circular economy:
Envisioning priorities through a Delphi approach. J. Clean. Prod. 228, 1494–1513. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2019.04.049
de Jesus, A., Mendonça, S., 2018. Lost in Transition? Drivers and Barriers in the Eco-innovation Road to the Circular
Economy. Ecol. Econ. 145, 75–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2017.08.001
De Schutter, O., 2019. With a ‘Farm to Fork’ Strategy on the cards, is the EU finally listening to its citizens? – EURACTIV.
com.
Del Borghi, A., Moreschi, L., Gallo, M., 2020. Circular economy approach to reduce water–energy–food nexus. Curr.
Opin. Environ. Sci. Heal. 13, 23–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coesh.2019.10.002
Delannoy, I., 2017. L’économie symbiotique : régénérer la planète, l’économie et la société. Actes Sud.
Deléage, J.-P., 2019. L’insurrection des « gilets jaunes », et après ? Ecol. Polit. N°58, 5. https://doi.org/10.3917/
ecopo1.058.0005

215

Bibliography
Delgadillo, E., Reyes, T., Baumgartner, R.J., 2021. Towards territorial product-service systems: A framework linking
resources, networks and value creation. Sustain. Prod. Consum. 28, 1297–1313. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
spc.2021.08.003
Delgado Ramos, G.C., 2015. Ciudad y Buen Vivir: ecología política urbana y alternativas para el bien común.
Theomai 32, 36–56.
Demacsek, C., Tange, L., Reichenecker, A., Altnau, G., 2019. PolyStyreneLoop – The circular economy in action. IOP
Conf. Ser. Earth Environ. Sci. 323, 012149. https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/323/1/012149
DeMatteo, R.S., Keith, M.M., Brophy, J.T., Wordsworth, A., Watterson, A.E., Beck, M., Ford, A.R., Gilbertson, M.,
Pharityal, J., Rootham, M., Scott, D.N., 2013. Chemical exposures of women workers in the plastics industry
with particular reference to breast cancer and reproductive hazards. New Solut. 22, 427–448. https://doi.
org/10.2190/NS.22.4.d
Demyttenaere, K., Dewit, I., Jacoby, A., 2016. The Influence of Ownership on the Sustainable Use of Productservice Systems - A Literature Review, in: Procedia CIRP. Elsevier, pp. 180–185. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
procir.2016.03.071
den Hollander, M.C., Bakker, C.A., Hultink, E.J., 2017. Product Design in a Circular Economy: Development of a
Typology of Key Concepts and Terms. J. Ind. Ecol. 21, 517–525. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12610
Deng, Y., Cai, L., Li, X., 2012. Research on the method of urban landscape ecological sustainable planning in the
viewpoint of deep ecology, in: Advanced Materials Research. Trans Tech Publications Ltd, pp. 1340–1345.
https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scientific.net/AMR.450-451.1340
Dengler, C., Lang, M., 2021. Commoning Care: Feminist Degrowth Visions for a Socio-Ecological Transformation.
Fem. Econ. https://doi.org/10.1080/13545701.2021.1942511
Derickson, K.D., 2014. The Racial Politics of Neoliberal Regulation in Post-Katrina Mississippi. Ann. Assoc. Am. Geogr.
104, 889–902. https://doi.org/10.1080/00045608.2014.912542
Desing, H., Brunner, D., Takacs, F., Nahrath, S., Frankenberger, K., Hischier, R., 2020. A circular economy within the
planetary boundaries: Towards a resource-based, systemic approach. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 155. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.104673
Deutz, P., 2009. Producer responsibility in a sustainable development context: Ecological modernisation or
industrial ecology? Geogr. J. 175, 274–285. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-4959.2009.00330.x
Di Chiro, G., 2019. Care not growth: Imagining a subsistence economy for all. Br. J. Polit. Int. Relations 21, 303–311.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1369148119836349
Diaz, A., Schöggl, J.P., Reyes, T., Baumgartner, R.J., 2021. Sustainable product development in a circular economy:
Implications for products, actors, decision-making support and lifecycle information management. Sustain.
Prod. Consum. 26, 1031–1045. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2020.12.044
Dimitropoulos, A., Tijm, J., in ’t Veld, D., 2021. Extended producer responsibility - Background document. The Hague.
Donati, F., Aguilar-Hernandez, G.A., Sigüenza-Sánchez, C.P., de Koning, A., Rodrigues, J.F.D., Tukker, A., 2020. Modeling
the circular economy in environmentally extended input-output tables: Methods, software and case study.
Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 152, 104508. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.104508
Driessen, P.P.J., Dieperink, C., van Laerhoven, F., Runhaar, H.A.C., Vermeulen, W.J.V., 2012. Towards a Conceptual
Framework for The Study of Shifts in Modes of Environmental Governance - Experiences From The
Netherlands. Environ. Policy Gov. 22, 143–160. https://doi.org/10.1002/eet.1580
Dryzek, J.S., 2013. The politics of the Earth : environmental discourses, 2nd Editio. ed. Oxford University Press,
London.
Dryzek, J.S., Bächtiger, A., Chambers, S., Cohen, J., Druckman, J.N., Felicetti, A., Fishkin, J.S., Farrell, D.M., Fung, A.,
Gutmann, A., Landemore, H., Mansbridge, J., Marien, S., Neblo, M.A., Niemeyer, S., Setälä, M., Slothuus, R.,
Suiter, J., Thompson, D., Warren, M.E., 2019. The crisis of democracy and the science of deliberation. Science
(80-. ). 363, 1144–1146. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaw2694
Du Plessis, C., 2012. Towards a regenerative paradigm for the built environment. Build. Res. Inf. 40, 7–22. https://doi.
org/10.1080/09613218.2012.628548
Dushkova, D., Haase, D., 2020. Not simply green: Nature-based solutions as a concept and practical approach for
sustainability studies and planning agendas in cities. Land 9, 19. https://doi.org/10.3390/land9010019
EC, 2014. Development of Guidance on Extended Producer Responsibility ( EPR ). Workshop minutes and
conclusions.

216

Bibliography
ECHA, 2017. An evaluation of the possible health risks of recycled rubber granules used as infill in synthetic turf
sports fields. Brussels.
Ede, S., 2016. The Real Cicular Economy: How Relocalising Production With Not-For-Profit Business Models Helps
Build Resilient and Prosperous Societies.
Eelderink, M., Vervoort, J.M., van Laerhoven, F., 2020. Using participatory action research to operationalize critical
systems thinking in social-ecological systems. Ecol. Soc. 25, art16. https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-11369-250116
Ehrlich, P.R., 1968. The population bomb, The Future of Nature: Documents of Global Change. Ballantine Books,
New York.
Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2021. Global Commitment: A circular economy for plastic in which it never becomes
waste [WWW Document]. URL https://www.newplasticseconomy.org/projects/global-commitment
(accessed 8.13.21).
Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2015. Towards a circular economy: business rationale for an accelerated transition.
Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2013. Towards the Circular Economy. Ellen MacArthur Found. 1, 1–96. https://doi.
org/10.1162/108819806775545321
Ellen MacArthur Foundation, Material Economics, 2019. Completing the Picture: How the Circular Economy Tackles
Climate Change.
Ellen MacArthur Foundation, McKinsey, 2015. Growth Within: A Circular Economy Vision For A Competitive Europe.
Elliott, T., Gillie, H., Thomson, A., 2020. European Union’s plastic strategy and an impact assessment of the proposed
directive on tackling single-use plastics items, in: Plastic Waste and Recycling. Elsevier, pp. 601–633. https://
doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-817880-5.00024-4
Ellis, G., Barry, J., Robinson, C., 2007. Many ways to say “no”, different ways to say “yes”: Applying Q-Methodology
to understand public acceptance of wind farm proposals. J. Environ. Plan. Manag. 50, 517–551. https://doi.
org/10.1080/09640560701402075
Elmqvist, T., Andersson, E., McPhearson, T., Bai, X., Bettencourt, L., Brondizio, E., Colding, J., Daily, G., Folke, C., Grimm,
N., Haase, D., Ospina, D., Parnell, S., Polasky, S., Seto, K.C., Van Der Leeuw, S., 2021. Urbanization in and for the
Anthropocene. npj Urban Sustain. 1, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42949-021-00018-w
EMF, 2015. Potential for Denmark as a Circular Economy: A Case Study From: Delivering the Circular Economy - A
Toolkit for Policy Maker.
Escobar, A., 2019. Habitability and design: Radical interdependence and the re-earthing of cities. Geoforum 101,
132–140. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2019.02.015
Escobar, A., 2018. Designs for the pluriverse : radical interdependence, autonomy, and the making of worlds. Duke
University Press, Durham, NC.
Escobar, A., 2014. Sentir-Penser avec la Terre. Une Ecologie au-delà de l’Occident. Seuil, Paris.
ETRMA, 2018. Used Tyres/ELT Management in Europe - Volumes Situation 2016.
ETRMA, 2015. ETRMA 2015 ELT Management figures. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp064861r
EU Commission, 2014. Development of Guidance on Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) FINAL REPORT
European Commission-DG Environment 2014 In collaboration with.
EU Commission, 2008. Directive 2008/98/EC on waste (Waste Framework Directive) - Environment - European
Commission [WWW Document].
European Commission, 2022. Scoping study to assess the feasibility of further EU measures on waste prevention :
final report. Luxembourg. https://doi.org/10.2779/304791
European Commission, 2021. Circular Plastics Alliance [WWW Document]. URL https://ec.europa.eu/growth/
industry/policy/circular-plastics-alliance_en
European Commission, 2020. A European Green Deal [WWW Document]. URL https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/
priorities-2019-2024/european-green-deal_en (accessed 6.30.20).
European Commission, 2019. ADAS | Mobility and transport [WWW Document]. Adv. Driv. Assist. Syst. URL https://
ec.europa.eu/transport/road_safety/topics/vehicles/inspection_en (accessed 10.28.19).
European Commission, 2018. A European Strategy for Plastics in a Circular Economy, European Commission.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b02368
European Commission, 2017. Study on the review of the list of Critical Raw Materials: Criticality Assessments Final
report, Publications Office of the European Union, 2017. https://doi.org/10.2873/876644

217

Bibliography
European Commission, 2015. Closing the loop - An EU action plan for the Circular Economy, European Commission.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004
European Commission, 2013. Closing the loop - An EU action plan for the Circular Economy. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 53,
1689–1699. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004
European Plastics Pact, 2021. Home - European Plastics Pact [WWW Document]. URL https://europeanplasticspact.
org/ (accessed 8.13.21).
European Tyre & Rubber Manufacters’ Association (ETRMA), 2017. ELT Management figures 2015.
Eurostat, 2020. Database - Eurostat [WWW Document]. online database. URL https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/data/
database (accessed 8.12.19).
Evans, D.M., Parsons, R., Jackson, P., Greenwood, S., Ryan, A., 2020. Understanding plastic packaging: The co-evolution
of materials and society. Glob. Environ. Chang. 65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2020.102166
Extinction Rebellion, 2019. Our Demands - Extinction Rebellion [WWW Document]. URL https://rebellion.earth/
the-truth/demands/ (accessed 10.28.19).
Fadeeva, Z., Van Berkel, R., 2021. ‘Unlocking circular economy for prevention of marine plastic pollution: An
exploration of G20 policy and initiatives.’ J. Environ. Manage. 277, 111457. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jenvman.2020.111457
Fals-Borda, O., 1987. The application of participatory action-research in latin america. Int. Sociol. 2, 329–347. https://
doi.org/10.1177/026858098700200401
Fanning, A.L., O’Neill, D.W., 2019. The Wellbeing–Consumption paradox: Happiness, health, income, and carbon
emissions in growing versus non-growing economies. J. Clean. Prod. 212, 810–821. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2018.11.223
Fanning, A.L., O’Neill, D.W., Büchs, M., 2020. Provisioning systems for a good life within planetary boundaries. Glob.
Environ. Chang. 64, 102135. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2020.102135
Fanning, A.L., O’Neill, D.W., Hickel, J., Roux, N., 2021. The social shortfall and ecological overshoot of nations. Nat.
Sustain. 2021 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-021-00799-z
Fardet, A., Rock, E., 2020. Ultra-Processed Foods and Food System Sustainability: What Are the Links? Sustain. 2020,
Vol. 12, Page 6280 12, 6280. https://doi.org/10.3390/SU12156280
Farmer, A., 2020. Developing the Circular Economy in the European Union, in: Circular Economy: Global Perspective.
Springer Singapore, Singapore, pp. 389–412. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-1052-6_20
Feiferytė-Skirienė, A., Stasiškienė, Ž., 2021. Seeking circularity: Circular urban metabolism in the context of industrial
symbiosis. Sustain. 13, 9094. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13169094
Felber, C., 2015. Change Everything: Creating an Economy for the Common Good. ZED Books.
Feola, G., 2019a. Capitalism in sustainability transitions research: Time for a critical turn? Environ. Innov. Soc.
Transitions. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2019.02.005
Feola, G., 2019b. Degrowth and the Unmaking of Capitalism: Beyond the “Decolonization of the Imaginary.” ACME
An Int. J. Crit. Geogr. 18, 977–997.
Feola, G., Jaworska, S., 2019. One transition, many transitions? A corpus-based study of societal sustainability
transition discourses in four civil society’s proposals. Sustain. Sci. 14, 1643–1656. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11625-018-0631-9
Feraldi, R., Cashman, S., Huff, M., Raahauge, L., 2013. Comparative LCA of treatment options for US scrap tires:
material recycling and tire-derived fuel combustion. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 18, 613–625. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11367-012-0514-8
Fergnani, A., 2019. Scenario archetypes of the futures of capitalism: The conflict between the psychological
attachment to capitalism and the prospect of its dissolution. Futures 105, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
futures.2018.06.006
Ferrão, P., Ribeiro, P., Silva, P., 2008. A management system for end-of-life tyres: A Portuguese case study. Waste
Manag. 28, 604–614. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2007.02.033
Ferreira, A., von Schönfeld, K.C., 2020. Interlacing Planning and Degrowth Scholarship: A Manifesto for an
Interdisciplinary Alliance. DISP 56, 53–64. https://doi.org/10.1080/02513625.2020.1756633
Fiksel, J., Bakshi, B.R., Baral, A., Guerra, E., Dequervain, B., 2011. Comparative life cycle assessment of beneficial
applications for scrap tires, in: Clean Technologies and Environmental Policy. pp. 19–35. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10098-010-0289-1
Fisher, M., 2009. Capitalist Realism: Is there no alternative? Zero Books, UK.

218

Bibliography
Fishkin, J.S., 2018. Democracy When the People Are Thinking: Revitalizing Our Politics Through Public Deliberation.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK. https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780198820291.001.0001
Fitch-Roy, O., Benson, D., Monciardini, D., 2020. Going around in circles? Conceptual recycling, patching and policy
layering in the EU circular economy package. Env. Polit. 29, 983–1003. https://doi.org/10.1080/09644016.2
019.1673996
Fletcher, R., 2019. Ecotourism after nature: Anthropocene tourism as a new capitalist “fix.” J. Sustain. Tour. 27, 522–
535. https://doi.org/10.1080/09669582.2018.1471084
Fletcher, R., 2012. Capitalizing on chaos: Climate change and disaster capitalism. Ephemera 12, 97–112.
Folke, C., Polasky, S., Rockström, J., Galaz, V., Westley, F., Lamont, M., Scheffer, M., Österblom, H., Carpenter, S.R.,
Chapin, F.S., Seto, K.C., Weber, E.U., Crona, B.I., Daily, G.C., Dasgupta, P., Gaffney, O., Gordon, L.J., Hoff, H., Levin,
S.A., Lubchenco, J., Steffen, W., Walker, B.H., 2021. Our future in the Anthropocene biosphere. Ambio 50, 834–
869. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13280-021-01544-8
Font Line Defenders, 2020. Global Aanalysis 2020. Dublin, Irland.
Foramitti, J., Varvarousis, A., Kallis, G., 2020. Transition within a transition: how cooperative platforms want to change
the sharing economy. Sustain. Sci. 15, 1185–1197. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-020-00804-y
Forrest, A., Giacovazzi, L., Dunlop, S., Reisser, J., Tickler, D., Jamieson, A., Meeuwig, J.J., 2019. Eliminating plastic
pollution: How a voluntary contribution from industry will drive the circular plastics economy. Front. Mar. Sci.
6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2019.00627
Foschi, E., Bonoli, A., 2019. The Commitment of Packaging Industry in the Framework of the European Strategy for
Plastics in a Circular Economy. Adm. Sci. 9, 18. https://doi.org/10.3390/admsci9010018
Foucault, M., 1972. The Archaeology of Knowledge and the Discourse on Language, translated by A. M. Sheridan
Smith, New York: Pantheon. Pantheon Books, New work .
Frankel, B., 2018. Fictions of sustainability : the politics of growth and post-capitalist futures. Greenmeadows,
Melbourne.
Frantzeskaki, N., Hölscher, K., Holman, I.P., Pedde, S., Jaeger, J., Kok, K., Harrison, P.A., 2019. Transition pathways to
sustainability in greater than 2 °C climate futures of Europe. Reg. Environ. Chang. 19, 777–789. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10113-019-01475-x
Fratini, C.F., Georg, S., Jørgensen, M.S., 2019. Exploring circular economy imaginaries in European cities: A research
agenda for the governance of urban sustainability transitions. J. Clean. Prod. 228, 974–989. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.04.193
Frenken, K., 2017. Political economies and environmental futures for the sharing economy. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A
Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 375. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2016.0367
Fresner, J., 1998. Cleaner production as a means for effective environmental management. J. Clean. Prod. 6, 171–
179. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-6526(98)00002-X
Fressoz, J., Bonneuil, C., 2016. L’Événement anthropocène. La Terre, l’histoire et nous: La Terre, l’histoire et nous, Seuil.
ed. Seuil, Paris.
Friend, J.K. (John K., Hickling, A., 2005. Planning under pressure : the strategic choice approach. Elsevier/Butterworth
Heinemann, Oxford, UK.
Frosch, R.A., Gallopoulos, N.E., 1989. Strategies for Manufacturing. Sci. Am. 261, 144–152. https://doi.org/10.1038/
scientificamerican0989-144
Fullerton, J., 2015. Regenerative Capitalism: How Universal Principles And Patterns Will Shape Our New Economy.
Capital Institute.
Fung, A., Wright, E.O., 2001. Deepening democracy: Innovations in empowered participatory governance. Polit.
Soc. 29, 5–41. https://doi.org/10.1177/0032329201029001002
Gall, S.C., Rodwell, L.D., 2016. Evaluating the social acceptability of Marine Protected Areas. Mar. Policy 65, 30–38.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2015.12.004
Garcia-Muiña, F.E., González-Sánchez, R., Ferrari, A.M., Volpi, L., Pini, M., Settembre-Blundo, C., Settembre-Blundo,
D., 2019. Identifying the Equilibrium Point between Sustainability Goals and Circular Economy Practices
in an Industry 4.0 Manufacturing Context Using Eco-Design. Soc. Sci. 8, 241. https://doi.org/10.3390/
socsci8080241
GCC, 2019. Inspiring a Circular Glasgow [WWW Document]. URL https://story.circularglasgow.com/inspiring-acircular-glasgow (accessed 3.7.22).

219

Bibliography
Geisendorf, S., Pietrulla, F., 2018. The circular economy and circular economic concepts—a literature analysis and
redefinition. Thunderbird Int. Bus. Rev. 60, 771–782. https://doi.org/10.1002/tie.21924
Geiser, K., 2001. Materials Matter: Toward a Sustainable Materials Policy. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Geissdoerfer, M., Morioka, S.N., de Carvalho, M.M., Evans, S., 2018. Business models and supply chains for the circular
economy. J. Clean. Prod. 190, 712–721. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.04.159
Geissdoerfer, M., Savaget, P., Bocken, N.M.P., Hultink, E.J., 2017. The Circular Economy – A new sustainability
paradigm? J. Clean. Prod. 143, 757–768. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.12.048
Genovese, A., Pansera, M., 2020. The Circular Economy at a Crossroads: Technocratic Eco-Modernism or Convivial
Technology for Social Revolution? Capital. Nature, Social. https://doi.org/10.1080/10455752.2020.1763414
Georgescu-Roegen, N., 1971. The Entropy Law and the Economic Process. Harvard University Press, Boston (MA).
Gerber, J.D., Gerber, J.F., 2017. Decommodification as a foundation for ecological economics. Ecol. Econ. 131, 551–
556. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2016.08.030
Geyer, R., Jambeck, J.R., Law, K.L., 2017. Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made. Sci. Adv. 3, e1700782.
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1700782
Ghisellini, P., Cialani, C., Ulgiati, S., 2016. A review on circular economy: The expected transition to a balanced
interplay of environmental and economic systems. J. Clean. Prod. 114, 11–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2015.09.007
Giampietro, M., 2019. On the Circular Bioeconomy and Decoupling: Implications for Sustainable Growth. Ecol. Econ.
162, 143–156. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2019.05.001
Giampietro, M., Funtowicz, S.O., 2020. From elite folk science to the policy legend of the circular economy. Environ.
Sci. Policy 109, 64–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2020.04.012
Glasgow City Council, 2020a. Circular Economy Route Map For Glasgow-2020.
Glasgow City Council, 2020b. Committee Report: Circular Economy Route Map for Glasgow.
Goedkoop, M.J., van Halen, C.J.G., te Riele, H.R.M., Rommens, P.J.M., 1999. Product Service systems, Ecological and
Economic Basics. The Hague.
Gorz, A., 1980. Ecology as politics. South End Press, Boston.
Government of Ecuador, 2008. Constitución de la República del Ecuador. Asamblea Constituyente del Ecuador,
Montecristi, Ecuador.
Government of Japan, 2000. Fundamental Law for Establishing a Sound Material-Cycle Society. Tokyo, Japan.
Government of Netherlands, 2017. Raw materials agreement.
Government of Netherlands, 2016. A Circular Economy in the Netherlands by 2050.
Government of the Netherlands, 2016. A Circular Economy in the Netherlands by 2050 [WWW Document]. URL
https://www.government.nl/documents/policy-notes/2016/09/14/a-circular-economy-in-the-netherlandsby-2050 (accessed 2.24.22).
Gradus, R., 2020. Postcollection separation of plastic recycling and design-for-recycling as solutions to low costeffectiveness and plastic debris. Sustain. 12, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12208415
Gradus, R.H.J.M., Nillesen, P.H.L., Dijkgraaf, E., van Koppen, R.J., 2017. A Cost-effectiveness Analysis for Incineration
or Recycling of Dutch Household Plastic Waste. Ecol. Econ. 135, 22–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecolecon.2016.12.021
Gram-Hanssen, I., 2019. The role of flexibility in enabling transformational social change: Perspectives from
an Indigenous community using Q-methodology. Geoforum 100, 10–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
geoforum.2019.02.001
Grant, M.J., Booth, A., 2009. A typology of reviews: An analysis of 14 review types and associated methodologies.
Health Info. Libr. J. 26, 91–108. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-1842.2009.00848.x
Gravagnuolo, A., Angrisano, M., Girard, L.F., 2019. Circular economy strategies in eight historic port cities: Criteria
and indicators towards a circular city assessment framework. Sustain. 11, 3512. https://doi.org/10.3390/
su11133512
Greenhalgh, T., Thorne, S., Malterud, K., 2018. Time to challenge the spurious hierarchy of systematic over narrative
reviews? Eur. J. Clin. Invest. 48, e12931. https://doi.org/10.1111/eci.12931
Greenpeace, 2018. Media briefing: EU’s last chance to tackle climate change - Greenpeace European Unit [WWW
Document]. Greenpeace. URL https://www.greenpeace.org/eu-unit/issues/climate-energy/1718/mediabriefing-eus-last-chance-to-tackle-climate-change/ (accessed 8.9.19).

220

Bibliography
Greenwood, S.C., Walker, S., Baird, H.M., Parsons, R., Mehl, S., Webb, T.L., Slark, A.T., Ryan, A.J., Rothman, R.H., 2021.
Many Happy Returns: Combining insights from the environmental and behavioural sciences to understand
what is required to make reusable packaging mainstream. Sustain. Prod. Consum. 27, 1688–1702. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.SPC.2021.03.022
Gregson, N., Crang, M., Fuller, S., Holmes, H., 2015. Interrogating the circular economy: the moral economy of
resource recovery in the EU. Econ. Soc. 44, 218–243. https://doi.org/10.1080/03085147.2015.1013353
Grin, J., 2018. Contemporary problems of well-being and how we got here, in: Well-Being, Sustainability and Social
Development: The Netherlands 1850-2050. Springer, Cham, pp. 509–536. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3319-76696-6_23
Gudynas, E., Acosta, A., 2011. The renewal of the criticism of development and Harmonious Coexistence as an
alternative [La renovación de la crítica al desarrollo y el buen vivir como alternativa]. Utop. y Prax. Latinoam.
16, 71–83.
Guide, V.D.R., Harrison, T.P., Van Wassenhove, L.N., 2003. The Challenge of Closed-Loop Supply Chains. Interfaces
(Providence). 33, 2–6.
Gupta, J., Liverman, D., Bai, X., Gordon, C., Hurlbert, M., Inoue, C.Y.A., Jacobson, L., Kanie, N., Lenton, T.M., Obura,
D., Otto, I.M., Okereke, C., Pereira, L., Prodani, K., Rammelt, C., Scholtens, J., Tàbara, J.D., Verburg, P.H., Gifford,
L., Ciobanu, D., 2021. Reconciling safe planetary targets and planetary justice: Why should social scientists
engage with planetary targets? Earth Syst. Gov. 10, 100122. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ESG.2021.100122
Gutberlet, J., Carenzo, S., Kain, J.H., de Azevedo, A.M.M., 2017. Waste picker organizations and their contribution
to the circular economy: Two case studies from a Global South Perspective. Resources 6. https://doi.
org/10.3390/resources6040052
Haas, W., Krausmann, F., Wiedenhofer, D., Heinz, M., 2015. How circular is the global economy?: An assessment of
material flows, waste production, and recycling in the European union and the world in 2005. J. Ind. Ecol. 19,
765–777. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12244
Haas, W., Krausmann, F., Wiedenhofer, D., Lauk, C., Mayer, A., 2020. Spaceship earth’s odyssey to a circular
economy - a century long perspective. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 163, 105076. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
resconrec.2020.105076
Haberl, H., Wiedenhofer, D., Erb, K.H., Görg, C., Krausmann, F., 2017. The material stock-flow-service nexus: A new
approach for tackling the decoupling conundrum. Sustain. 9. https://doi.org/10.3390/su9071049
Haberl, H., Wiedenhofer, D., Virág, D., Kalt, G., Plank, B., Brockway, P., Fishman, T., Hausknost, D., Krausmann, F., LeonGruchalski, B., Mayer, A., Pichler, M., Schaffartzik, A., Sousa, T., Streeck, J., Creutzig, F., 2020. A systematic review
of the evidence on decoupling of GDP, resource use and GHG emissions, part II: Synthesizing the insights.
Environ. Res. Lett. 15. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ab842a
Haigh, L., Wit, M. de, Daniels, C. von, Colloricchio, A., Hoogzaad, J., Fraser, M., Sutherland, A.B., McClelland, J.,
Morgenroth, N., Heidtmann, A., 2021. The Circularity Gap Report 2021, Circle Economy. Amsterdam.
Hajer, M., Versteeg, W., 2005. A decade of discourse analysis of environmental politics: Achievements, challenges,
perspectives. J. Environ. Policy Plan. 7, 175–184. https://doi.org/10.1080/15239080500339646
Haluza-DeLay, R., Berezan, R., 2013. Permaculture in the city: Ecological habitus and the distributed ecovillage,
in: Lockyear, J., Veteto, J. (Eds.), Localizing Environmental Anthropology: Bioregionalism, Permaculture, and
Ecovillage Design for a Sustainable Future. Berghan Books, pp. 130–145.
Handcock, M.S., Gile, K.J., 2011. Comment: On the Concept of Snowball Sampling. Sociol. Methodol. 41, 367–371.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9531.2011.01243.x
Hanumante, N.C., Shastri, Y., Hoadley, A., 2019. Assessment of circular economy for global sustainability using an
integrated model. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 151, 104460. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.104460
Hara, K., Yabar, H., 2012. Historical evolution and development of waste management and recycling systemsanalysis of Japan’s experiences. J. Environ. Stud. Sci. 2, 296–307. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13412-012-0094-8
Harari, Y.N., 2014. SAPIENS - A brief history of humankind, Random House. Harper, New York. https://doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9781107415324.004
Hardin, G., 1968. The tragedy of the commons. Science 162, 1243–8. https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.162.3859.1243
Hartley, K., van Santen, R., Kirchherr, J., 2020. Policies for transitioning towards a circular economy: Expectations
from the European Union (EU). Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 155, 104634. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
resconrec.2019.104634

221

Bibliography
Hartley, T., van den Bergh, J., Kallis, G., 2020. Policies for Equality Under Low or No Growth: A Model Inspired by
Piketty. Rev. Polit. Econ. https://doi.org/10.1080/09538259.2020.1769293
Harvey, D., 2012. Rebel Cities From the Right to the City to the Urban Revolution. Verso, London and New York City.
Hauser, O.P., Rand, D.G., Peysakhovich, A., Nowak, M.A., 2014. Cooperating with the future. Nature 511, 220–223.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13530
Hausknost, D., Schriefl, E., Lauk, C., Kalt, G., 2017. A transition to which bioeconomy? An exploration of diverging
techno-political choices. Sustain. 9. https://doi.org/10.3390/su9040669
Hawken, P., 2017. Drawdown: The Most Comprehensive Plan Ever Proposed to Reverse Global Warming. Penguin
Books, London.
Hawken, P., Lovins, A.B., Lovins, L.H., 1999. Natural capitalism : creating the next industrial revolution. Little, Brown
and Co.
Hayward, B., Roy, J., 2019. Sustainable Living: Bridging the North-South Divide in Lifestyles and Consumption
Debates. Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour. 44, annurev-environ-101718-033119. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurevenviron-101718-033119
Heck, V., Hoff, H., Wirsenius, S., Meyer, C., Kreft, H., 2018. Land use options for staying within the Planetary Boundaries
– Synergies and trade-offs between global and local sustainability goals. Glob. Environ. Chang. 49, 73–84.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2018.02.004
Helne, T., Hirvilammi, T., 2019. Having, Doing, Loving, Being: Sustainable Well-Being for a Post-Growth Society, in:
CHERTKOVSKAYA, E., PAULSSON, A., BARCA, S. (Eds.), Towards a Political Economy of Degrowth. Rowman &
Littlefield Publishers.
Henckens, M.L.C.M., Driessen, P.P.J., Worrell, E., 2014. Metal scarcity and sustainability, analyzing the necessity
to reduce the extraction of scarce metals. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 93, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
resconrec.2014.09.012
Hendrixson, A., Hartmann, B., 2019. Threats and burdens: Challenging scarcity-driven narratives of “overpopulation.”
Geoforum 101, 250–259. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2018.08.009
Hermann, R.R., Pansera, M., 2020. Contingencies of Circular Economy: Discourse Hegemony and Institutionalization
in Norway. SSRN Electron. J. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3690601
Herrington, G., 2021. Update to limits to growth: Comparing the World3 model with empirical data. J. Ind. Ecol. 25,
614–626. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.13084
Hickel, J., 2021. Less is More: How Degrowth Will Save the World. Penguin Random House, London, UK.
Hickel, J., 2020a. The sustainable development index: Measuring the ecological efficiency of human development
in the anthropocene. Ecol. Econ. 167. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2019.05.011
Hickel, J., 2020b. Less is More: How Degrowth Will Save the World. Penguin Random House.
Hickel, J., 2019. Is it possible to achieve a good life for all within planetary boundaries? Third World Q. 40, 18–35.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01436597.2018.1535895
Hickel, J., 2017. Is global inequality getting better or worse? A critique of the World Bank’s convergence narrative.
Third World Q. 38, 2208–2222. https://doi.org/10.1080/01436597.2017.1333414
Hickel, J., Kallis, G., 2019. Is Green Growth Possible? New Polit. Econ. 0, 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1080/13563467.20
19.1598964
Hirwani, V., Vaiya, S., 2020. A Review of Walkable Neighbourhoods and its Multifaceted Benefits. Int. J. Innov. Sci. Res.
Technol. 5, 1375–1388.
Hobson, K., 2019. ‘Small stories of closing loops’: social circularity and the everyday circular economy. Clim. Change
forthcomin. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-019-02480-z
Hobson, K., Lynch, N., 2016. Diversifying and de-growing the circular economy: Radical social transformation in a
resource-scarce world. Futures 82, 15–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2016.05.012
Hofmann, F., Jaeger-Erben, M., 2020. Organizational transition management of circular business model innovations.
Bus. Strateg. Environ. 29, 2770–2788. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2542
Höhne, N., de Villafranca, M.J., Nascimento, L., Kuramochi, T., Hans, F., Luna, L., Fekete, H., Warnecke, C., 2019. A
possible 2050 climate target for the EU. Cologne, Germany.
Holcomb, R.W., 1970. Waste-water treatment: The tide is turning. Science (80-. ). 169, 457–459. https://doi.
org/10.1126/science.169.3944.457

222

Bibliography
Holmes, J., 2021. Losing 25,000 to Hunger Every Day. United Nations.
Homrich, A.S., Galvão, G., Abadia, L.G., Carvalho, M.M., 2018. The circular economy umbrella: Trends and gaps on
integrating pathways. J. Clean. Prod. 175, 525–543. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.11.064
Hong, W., Li, F., Li, M., Zhang, F., Tong, L., Huang, Q., 2014. Toward a Sustainable Utilization of Land Resources in
China: Problems, Policies, and Practices. Ambio 43, 825–835. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13280-013-0464-9
Hopkins, R., 2008. The Transition Handbook From oil dependency to local resilience. Green Books, Foxhole, Devon.
Hotta, Y., 2011. Is resource efficiency a solution for sustainability challenges?-Japan’s sustainable strategy and
resource productivity policy in the 21st century. Sapiens 4, 1–12.
Hughes, B., Jones, D., Amarasingam, A., 2022. Ecofascism: An Examination of the Far-Right/Ecology Nexus in the
Online Space. Terror. Polit. Violence 34, 997–1023. https://doi.org/10.1080/09546553.2022.2069932
Hughes, D.E., 1975. Biological aspects of recycling. J. R. Soc. Arts 123, 114–125.
Illich, I., 1973. Tools for conviviality. Harper & Row, New York. https://doi.org/World Perspectives, Volume Forty-seven
ILO, 2022. World Statistic, The enormous burden of poor working conditions [WWW Document]. URL http://
www.ilo.org/moscow/areas-of-work/occupational-safety-and-health/WCMS_249278/lang--en/index.htm
(accessed 2.8.22).
Invest Glasgow, n.d. City Prospectus. Glasgow.
IPCC, 2022. Climate Change 2022 - Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability, Ipcc.
IPCC, 2019. Summary for Policymakers Climate Change and Land An IPCC Special Report on climate change,
desertification, land degradation, sustainable land management, food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes
in terrestrial ecosystems.
IRP, 2019. Global Resources Outlook 2019: Natural Resources for the Future We Want. Nairobi, Kenya.
Irwin, T., 2015. Transition design: A proposal for a new area of design practice, study, and research. Des. Cult. 7,
229–246. https://doi.org/10.1080/17547075.2015.1051829
Jackson, T., 2021. Post Growth—Life After Capitalism. Wiley.
Jackson, T., 2016. Prosperity without growth : foundations for the economy of tomorrow, 2nd editio. ed. Routledge,
London.
Jackson, T., Victor, P.A., 2019. Unraveling the claims for (and against) green growth. Science 366, 950–951. https://
doi.org/10.1126/science.aay0749
Jaeger-Erben, M., Hofmann, F., 2020. From Take-Make-Dispose to a Circular Society: Introduction of a new vision in
six propositions. Berlin.
Jaeger-Erben, M., Jensen, C., Hofmann, F., Zwiers, J., 2021. There is no sustainable circular economy without a
circular society. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2021.105476
Japanese Ministry of the Environment, 2018. Annual Report on the Environment, the Sound Material-Cycle Society
and Biodiversity in Japan 2018. Tokyo, Japan.
Jin, Y., 2008. Ecological civilization: From conception to practice in China. Clean Technol. Environ. Policy 10, 111–
112. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10098-008-0147-6
Joensuu, T., Edelman, H., Saari, A., 2020. Circular economy practices in the built environment. J. Clean. Prod. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.124215
Junnila, S., Ottelin, J., Leinikka, L., 2018. Influence of reduced ownership on the environmental benefits of the
circular economy. Sustain. 10. https://doi.org/10.3390/su10114077
Jurgilevich, A., Birge, T., Kentala-Lehtonen, J., Korhonen-Kurki, K., Pietikäinen, J., Saikku, L., Schösler, H., 2016.
Transition towards circular economy in the food system. Sustain. 8, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.3390/su8010069
Kalimo, H., Lifset, R., Atasu, A., Van Rossem, C., Van Wassenhove, L., 2015. What Roles for Which Stakeholders under
Extended Producer Responsibility? Rev. Eur. Comp. Int. Environ. Law 24, 40–57. https://doi.org/10.1111/
reel.12087
Kallis, G., 2019. Limits: why Malthus was wrong and why environmentalists should care. Stanford University Press.
Kallis, G., Kostakis, V., Lange, S., Muraca, B., Paulson, S., Schmelzer, M., 2018. Research on Degrowth. Annu. Rev. Environ.
Resour. 43, annurev-environ-102017-025941. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-environ-102017-025941
Kalmykova, Y., Sadagopan, M., Rosado, L., 2018. Circular economy – From review of theories and practices to
development of implementation tools. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 135, 190–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
resconrec.2017.10.034

223

Bibliography
Kamlage, J.H., Nanz, P., 2017. Crisis and participation in the European union: Energy policy as a test bed for a new
politics of citizen participation. Glob. Soc. 31, 65–82. https://doi.org/10.1080/13600826.2016.1235553
Karami, A., Golieskardi, A., Keong Choo, C., Larat, V., Galloway, T.S., Salamatinia, B., 2017. The presence of microplastics
in commercial salts from different countries. Sci. Rep. 7, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep46173
Kaźmierczyk, P., 2018. Implementing Resource Efficiency in Europe – Overview of Policies, Instruments and Targets
in 32 European Countries, in: Lehmann, H. (Ed.), Factor X Challenges, Implementation Strategies and Examples
for a Sustainable Use of Natural Resources. Springer, Cham, pp. 185–198. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-31950079-9_11
Kębłowski, W., Lambert, D., Bassens, D., 2020. Circular economy and the city: an urban political economy agenda.
Cult. Organ. 26, 142–158. https://doi.org/10.1080/14759551.2020.1718148
Kerschner, C., Wächter, P., Nierling, L., Ehlers, M.H., 2018. Degrowth and Technology: Towards feasible, viable,
appropriate and convivial imaginaries. J. Clean. Prod. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.07.147
Kirchherr, J., Piscicelli, L., Bour, R., Kostense-Smit, E., Muller, J., Huibrechtse-Truijens, A., Hekkert, M., 2018. Barriers
to the Circular Economy: Evidence From the European Union (EU). Ecol. Econ. 150, 264–272. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2018.04.028
Kirchherr, J., Pohlner, H., Charles, K.J., 2016. Cleaning up the big muddy: A meta-synthesis of the research on the
social impact of dams. Environ. Impact Assess. Rev. 60, 115–125. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eiar.2016.02.007
Kirchherr, J., Reike, D., Hekkert, M., 2017. Conceptualizing the circular economy: An analysis of 114 definitions.
Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 127, 221–232. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.09.005
Kirchherr, J., van Santen, R., 2019. Research on the circular economy: A critique of the field. Resour. Conserv. Recycl.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.104480
Kjaer, L.L., Pigosso, D.C.A., Niero, M., Bech, N.M., McAloone, T.C., 2019. Product/Service-Systems for a Circular
Economy: The Route to Decoupling Economic Growth from Resource Consumption? J. Ind. Ecol. 23, 22–35.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12747
Klein, N., 2014. This Changes Everything: Capitalism vs. the Climate. Simon & Schuster, New York (USA).
Klein, N., Ramos, T.B., Deutz, P., 2021. Correction to: Advancing the Circular Economy in Public Sector Organisations:
Employees’ Perspectives on Practices. Circ. Econ. Sustain. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43615-021-00086-1
Klemeš, J.J., Fan, Y. Van, Jiang, P., 2021. Plastics: friends or foes? The circularity and plastic waste footprint. Energy
Sources, Part A Recover. Util. Environ. Eff. 43, 1549–1565. https://doi.org/10.1080/15567036.2020.1801906
Knill, C., Steinebach, Y., Fernández-i-Marín, X., 2020. Hypocrisy as a crisis response? Assessing changes in talk,
decisions, and actions of the European Commission in EU environmental policy. Public Adm. 98, 363–377.
https://doi.org/10.1111/padm.12542
Kondracki, N.L., Wellman, N.S., Amundson, D.R., 2002. Content analysis: Review of methods and their applications in
nutrition education. J. Nutr. Educ. Behav. 34, 224–230. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1499-4046(06)60097-3
Koretskaya, O., Feola, G., 2020. A framework for recognizing diversity beyond capitalism in agri-food systems. J. Rural
Stud. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2020.10.002
Korhonen, J., Honkasalo, A., Seppälä, J., 2018a. Circular Economy: The Concept and its Limitations. Ecol. Econ. 143,
37–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2017.06.041
Korhonen, J., Nuur, C., Feldmann, A., Birkie, S.E., 2018b. Circular economy as an essentially contested concept. J.
Clean. Prod. 175, 544–552. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.12.111
Korsunsky, A., 2019. From vacant land to urban fallows: A permacultural approach to wasted land in cities and
suburbs. J. Polit. Ecol. 26, 282–304. https://doi.org/10.2458/v26i1.22949
Korten, D.C., 2015. Change the story, change the future : a living economy for a living earth. Berrett-Koehler
Publishers, San Francisco, California, United States.
Kosuth, M., Mason, S.A., Wattenberg, E. V., 2018. Anthropogenic contamination of tap water, beer, and sea salt. PLoS
One 13, e0194970. https://doi.org/10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0194970
Kothari, A., Demaria, F., Acosta, A., 2014. Buen Vivir, Degrowth and Ecological Swaraj: Alternatives to sustainable
development and the Green Economy. Dev. 57, 362–375. https://doi.org/10.1057/dev.2015.24
Kothari, A., Salleh, A., Escobar, A., Demaria, F., Acosta, A., 2019. Pluriverse: a post-development dictionary. Tulika
Books, New Delhi, India.
Krähmer, K., 2022. Degrowth and the city. City 1–30. https://doi.org/10.1080/13604813.2022.2035969
Krähmer, K., 2021. Are green cities sustainable? A degrowth critique of sustainable urban development in
Copenhagen. Eur. Plan. Stud. 29, 1272–1289. https://doi.org/10.1080/09654313.2020.1841119

224

Bibliography
Krämer, L., 2019. Global environmental challenges and the EU. ERA Forum 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12027018-0544-1
Krausmann, F., Lauk, C., Haas, W., Wiedenhofer, D., 2018. From resource extraction to outflows of wastes and
emissions: The socioeconomic metabolism of the global economy, 1900–2015. Glob. Environ. Chang. 52,
131–140. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2018.07.003
Krogh Jensen, T., 2019. Copenhagen: The Nordic Capital of Asset Management and Fintech - Business Insights. Bus.
Insights.
Kühl, C., Bourlakis, M., Aktas, E., Skipworth, H., 2019. How does servitisation affect supply chain circularity? – A
systematic literature review. J. Enterp. Inf. Manag. https://doi.org/10.1108/JEIM-01-2019-0024
Kumarappa, J.C., 1945. Economy of Permanence: A quest for a social order based on non-violence. Sarva Seva
Sangh Prakashan, Rajghat, Varanasi, India.
Kunz, N., Mayers, K., Van Wassenhove, L.N., 2018. Stakeholder Views on Extended Producer Responsibility and the
Circular Economy. Calif. Manage. Rev. 60, 45–70. https://doi.org/10.1177/0008125617752694
Kusumo, C., 2012. Cradle To Cradle in Urban Planning. Dimens. (Jurnal Tek. Arsitektur) 38, 31–34. https://doi.
org/10.9744/dimensi.38.1.31-34
Kuzmina, K., Prendeville, S., Walker, D., Charnley, F., 2019. Future scenarios for fast-moving consumer goods in a
circular economy. Futures 107, 74–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2018.12.001
Landi, D., Gigli, S., Germani, M., Marconi, M., 2018a. Investigating the feasibility of a reuse scenario for textile fibres
recovered from end-of-life tyres. Waste Manag. 75, 187–204. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2018.02.018
Landi, D., Marconi, M., Meo, I., Germani, M., 2018b. Reuse scenarios of tires textile fibers: An environmental
evaluation, in: Procedia Manufacturing. pp. 329–336. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2018.02.128
Lang, D.J., Wiek, A., Bergmann, M., Stauffacher, M., Martens, P., Moll, P., Swilling, M., Thomas, C.J., 2012. Transdisciplinary
research in sustainability science: Practice, principles, and challenges. Sustain. Sci. 7, 25–43. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11625-011-0149-x
Lansink, A., Veld, H. de V., 2010. De kracht van de Kringloop: geschiedenis en toekomst van de Ladder van Lansink.
Vrilan, Apeldoorn.
Lapko, Y., Trianni, A., Nuur, C., Masi, D., 2019. In Pursuit of Closed-Loop Supply Chains for Critical Materials: An
Exploratory Study in the Green Energy Sector. J. Ind. Ecol. 23, 182–196. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12741
Latouche, S., 2018. The Path to Degrowth for a Sustainable Society, in: Lehmann, H. (Ed.), Factor X Challenges,
Implementation Strategies and Examples for a Sustainable Use of Natural Resources. Springer, Cham, pp.
277–284. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-50079-9_17
Latouche, S., 2016. Degrowth as a territorial-landscape project. J. Res. Didact. Geogr. 1, 89–94. https://doi.
org/10.4458/6964-08
Latouche, S., 2009. Farewell to growth. Polity, Cambridge (UK).
Laurent, É., 2019. La Transition Écologique Française : De L’enlisement À L’encastrement. OFCE policy Br. 1–8.
Law, K.L., 2017. Plastics in the Marine Environment. Ann. Rev. Mar. Sci. 9, 205–229. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurevmarine-010816-060409
Lawhon, M., Murphy, J.T., 2012. Socio-technical regimes and sustainability transitions: Insights from political
ecology. Prog. Hum. Geogr. 36, 354–378. https://doi.org/10.1177/0309132511427960
Lawson, M., Chan, M.-K., Rhodes, F., Parvez Butt, A., Marriott, A., Ehmke, E., Jacobs, D., Seghers, J., Atienza, J., Gowland,
R., 2019. Public Good or Private Wealth? Even it up. Oxfam, Oxford, UK. https://doi.org/10.21201/2019.3651
Lazarevic, D., Valve, H., 2017. Narrating expectations for the circular economy: Towards a common and contested
European transition. Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 31, 60–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2017.05.006
Lehmann, H., Schmidt-Bleek, F., Manstein, C., 2018. Factor X – 25 Years – “Factor X Concept” Is Essential for Achieving
Sustainable Development, in: Lehmann, H. (Ed.), Factor X Challenges, Implementation Strategies and
Examples for a Sustainable Use of Natural Resources. pp. 3–12. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-50079-9_1
Lehmann, S., 2018. Implementing the Urban Nexus approach for improved resource-efficiency of developing cities
in Southeast-Asia. City, Cult. Soc. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccs.2017.10.003
Lehmann, S., 2013. Sustainable building design and systems integration: Combining energy efficiency with
material efficiency, in: Designing for Zero Waste: Consumption, Technologies and the Built Environment. pp.
209–246. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203146057
Lehtinen, A.A., 2018. Degrowth in city planning. Fennia 196, 43–57. https://doi.org/10.11143/fennia.65443

225

Bibliography
Leipold, S., Feindt, P.H., Winkel, G., Keller, R., 2019. Discourse analysis of environmental policy revisited: traditions,
trends, perspectives. J. Environ. Policy Plan. 21, 445–463. https://doi.org/10.1080/1523908X.2019.1660462
Leipold, S., Weldner, K., Hohl, M., 2021. Do we need a ‘ circular society ’ ? Competing narratives of the circular
economy in the French food sector 187.
Lekan, M., Jonas, A.E.G., Deutz, P., 2021. Circularity as Alterity? Untangling Circuits of Value in the Social Enterprise–
Led Local Development of the Circular Economy. Econ. Geogr. 97, 257–283. https://doi.org/10.1080/00130
095.2021.1931109
Leslie, H.A., Leonards, P.E.G., Brandsma, S.H., de Boer, J., Jonkers, N., 2016. Propelling plastics into the circular economy
- weeding out the toxics first. Environ. Int. 94, 230–234. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2016.05.012
Levick, R., Davies, D.R., 1975. Resource Recovery From Industrial And Domestic Waste. J. R. Soc. Arts 123, 126–138.
Li, P., Wang, X., Su, M., Zou, X., Duan, L., Zhang, H., 2020. Characteristics of Plastic Pollution in the Environment: A
Review. Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00128-020-02820-1
Li, X., Xu, H., Gao, Y., Tao, Y., 2010. Comparison of end-of-life tire treatment technologies: A Chinese case study. Waste
Manag. 30, 2235–2246. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.WASMAN.2010.06.006
Liebezeit, G., Liebezeit, E., 2014. Synthetic particles as contaminants in German beers. Food Addit. Contam. - Part A
Chem. Anal. Control. Expo. Risk Assess. 31, 1574–1578. https://doi.org/10.1080/19440049.2014.945099
Liebezeit, G., Liebezeit, E., 2013. Non-pollen particulates in honey and sugar. Food Addit. Contam. - Part A Chem.
Anal. Control. Expo. Risk Assess. 30, 2136–2140. https://doi.org/10.1080/19440049.2013.843025
Lindhqvist, T., 2000. Extended Producer Responsibility in Cleaner Production: Policy Principle to promote
Environmental Improvements of Product Systems. Lund University. https://doi.org/http://www.lub.lu.se/
luft/diss/tec355.pdf
Løkke, A.-K., Sørensen, P.D., 2014. Theory Testing Using Case Studies . Electron. J. Bus. Res. Methods 12.
Lonca, G., Muggéo, R., Imbeault-Tétreault, H., Bernard, S., Margni, M., 2018. Does material circularity rhyme with
environmental efficiency? Case studies on used tires. J. Clean. Prod. 183, 424–435. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2018.02.108
Lorenz, U., Sverdrup, H.U., Ragnarsdottir, K.V., 2018. Global Megatrends and Resource Use – A Systemic Reflection,
in: Lehmann, H. (Ed.), Factor X Challenges, Implementation Strategies and Examples for a Sustainable Use of
Natural Resources. Springer, Cham, pp. 31–43. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-50079-9_3
Löwy, M., 2011. Ecosocialisme: L’Alternative Radicale a la Catastrophe Ecologique Capitaliste. Mille Et Une Nuits,
Paris.
Lucertini, G., Musco, F., 2020. Circular Urban Metabolism Framework. One Earth 2, 138–142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
oneear.2020.02.004
Lüdeke-Freund, F., Gold, S., Bocken, N.M.P., 2019. A Review and Typology of Circular Economy Business Model
Patterns. J. Ind. Ecol. 23, 36–61. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12763
Lyle, J.T., 1994. Regenerative design for sustainable development. John Wiley, New York (USA).
Mah, A., 2021. Future-Proofing Capitalism: The Paradox of the Circular Economy for Plastics. Glob. Environ. Polit. 21,
121–142. https://doi.org/10.1162/GLEP_A_00594
Maitre-Ekern, E., 2021. Re-thinking producer responsibility for a sustainable circular economy from extended
producer responsibility to pre-market producer responsibility. J. Clean. Prod. 286. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2020.125454
Maldini, I., 2021. The Amsterdam Doughnut: moving towards “strong sustainable consumption” policy?, in: 4th
PLATE 2021 Virtual Conference. Limerick, Ireland.
Malleson, T., 2016. A Community-Based Good Life or Eco-Apartheid. Radic. Philos. Rev. 19, 593–619. https://doi.
org/10.5840/radphilrev201542839
Manikkam, M., Tracey, R., Guerrero-Bosagna, C., Skinner, M.K., 2013. Plastics Derived Endocrine Disruptors (BPA,
DEHP and DBP) Induce Epigenetic Transgenerational Inheritance of Obesity, Reproductive Disease and
Sperm Epimutations. PLoS One 8, 55387. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0055387
Manley, J., Aiken, M., 2020. A socio-economic system for affect: dreaming of cooperative relationships and affect in
Bermuda, Preston, and Mondragón. Organ. Soc. Dyn. 20, 173–190.
Mann, C.C., 2018. The wizard and the prophet : two groundbreaking scientists and their conflicting visions of the
future of our planet. Alfred A. Knopf, New York.

226

Bibliography
Manninen, K., Koskela, S., Antikainen, R., Bocken, N., Dahlbo, H., Aminoff, A., 2018. Do circular economy business
models capture intended environmental value propositions? J. Clean. Prod. 171, 413–422. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.10.003
Marín-Beltrán, I., Demaria, F., Ofelio, C., Serra, L.M., Turiel, A., Ripple, W.J., Mukul, S.A., Costa, M.C., 2022. Scientists’warning
against the society of waste. Sci. Total Environ. 811, 151359. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151359
Marin, J., De Meulder, B., 2018. Interpreting circularity. Circular city representations concealing transition drivers.
Sustain. 10, 1310. https://doi.org/10.3390/su10051310
Martinez-Alier, J., 2021a. Mapping ecological distribution conflicts: The EJAtlas. Extr. Ind. Soc. 8, 100883. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.EXIS.2021.02.003
Martinez-Alier, J., 2021b. Circularity, entropy, ecological conflicts and LFFU. Local Environ. https://doi.org/10.1080/
13549839.2021.1983795
Mayumi, K., Giampietro, M., 2019. Reconsidering “circular economy” in terms of irreversible evolution of economic
activity and interplay between technosphere and biosphere. Rom. J. Econ. Forecast. 22, 196–206.
McCarville, H., 2019. Turning the Netherlands into a Plastic Circular Hotspot. F. Actions Sci. Reports. J. F. actions
82–85.
McDonough, W., Braungart, M., 2002. Cradle to cradle : remaking the way we make things. North Point Press, New
York (USA).
McDowall, W., Geng, Y., Huang, B., Barteková, E., Bleischwitz, R., Türkeli, S., Kemp, R., Doménech, T., 2017. Circular
Economy Policies in China and Europe. J. Ind. Ecol. 21, 651–661. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12597
McInroy, N., 2018. Wealth for all: Building new local economies. Local Econ. 33, 678–687. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0269094218803084
Meadows, D., 1999. Leverage Points: Places to intervene in a system, Leverage Points Places to Intervene in a
System. https://doi.org/10.1080/02604020600912897
Meadows, D.H., Meadows, D.L., Randers, J., Behrens, W.W., 1972. Limits to growth, Universe Books. New York (USA).
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-63768-0.00630-2
Meadows, D., Meadows, DH, Behrens, W., Randers, J., 1972. The limits to growth: a report for the club of Rome’s
project on the predicament of mankind. Universe Books, New York.
Medina, N.F., Garcia, R., Hajirasouliha, I., Pilakoutas, K., Guadagnini, M., Raffoul, S., 2018. Composites with recycled
rubber aggregates: Properties and opportunities in construction. Constr. Build. Mater. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2018.08.069
Mehta, L., Huff, A., Allouche, J., 2019. The new politics and geographies of scarcity. Geoforum 101, 222–230. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2018.10.027
Melles, G., 2021. Figuring the transition from circular economy to circular society in Australia. Sustain. 13, 10601.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su131910601
Merli, R., Preziosi, M., Acampora, A., 2018. How do scholars approach the circular economy? A systematic literature
review. J. Clean. Prod. 178, 703–722. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.12.112
Micheaux, H., Aggeri, F., 2021. Eco-modulation as a driver for eco-design: A dynamic view of the French collective
EPR scheme. J. Clean. Prod. 289, 125714. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.125714
Milanez, B., Bührs, T., 2009. Extended producer responsibility in Brazil: the case of tyre waste. J. Clean. Prod. 17,
608–615. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2008.10.004
Milios, L., 2018. Advancing to a Circular Economy: three essential ingredients for a comprehensive policy mix.
Sustain. Sci. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-017-0502-9
Milios, L., Holm Christensen, L., McKinnon, D., Christensen, C., Rasch, M.K., Hallstrøm Eriksen, M., 2018. Plastic
recycling in the Nordics: A value chain market analysis. Waste Manag. 76, 180–189. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
wasman.2018.03.034
Millar, N., McLaughlin, E., Börger, T., 2019. The Circular Economy: Swings and Roundabouts? Ecol. Econ. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2018.12.012
Mills, A., Durepos, G., Wiebe, E., 2012. Encyclopedia of Case Study Research. Encycl. Case Study Res. https://doi.
org/10.4135/9781412957397
Ministry of Environment and Food of Denmark, 2018. Strategy for Circular Economy [WWW Document]. URL
https://en.fvm.dk/focus-on/circular-economy/strategy-for-circular-economy/ (accessed 3.10.22).

227

Bibliography
Ministry of Infrastructure and Environment & Ministry of Economic Affairs, 2016. A circular economy in the
Netherlands by 2050 1–72.
Mmereki, D., Machola, B., Mokokwe, K., 2019. Status of waste tires and management practice in Botswana. J. Air
Waste Manag. Assoc. 69, 1230–1246. https://doi.org/10.1080/10962247.2017.1279696
Mollison, B.C., Holmgren, D., 1978. Permaculture one : a perennial agriculture for human settlements. Transworld
Publishers, Melbourne, Australia.
Monsaingeon, B., 2017. Homo detritus-Critique de la société du déchet. Seuil, Paris.
Mont, O., Neuvonen, A., Lähteenoja, S., 2014. Sustainable lifestyles 2050: Stakeholder visions, emerging practices
and future research. J. Clean. Prod. 63, 24–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.09.007
Moraga, G., Huysveld, S., Mathieux, F., Blengini, G.A., Alaerts, L., Van Acker, K., de Meester, S., Dewulf, J., 2019. Circular
economy indicators: What do they measure? Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 146, 452–461. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
resconrec.2019.03.045
Moreau, V., Dos Reis, P., Vuille, F., 2019. Enough Metals? Resource Constraints to Supply a Fully Renewable Energy
System. Resources 8, 29. https://doi.org/10.3390/resources8010029
Moreau, V., Sahakian, M., van Griethuysen, P., Vuille, F., 2017. Coming Full Circle: Why Social and Institutional
Dimensions Matter for the Circular Economy. J. Ind. Ecol. 21, 497–506. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12598
Morrison, A., Polisena, J., Husereau, D., Moulton, K., Clark, M., Fiander, M., Mierzwinski-Urban, M., Clifford, T., Hutton,
B., Rabb, D., 2012. The effect of english-language restriction on systematic review-based meta-analyses:
A systematic review of empirical studies. Int. J. Technol. Assess. Health Care. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0266462312000086
Morrow, O., Davies, A., 2021. Creating careful circularities: Community composting in New York City. Trans. Inst. Br.
Geogr. https://doi.org/10.1111/tran.12523
Morseletto, P., 2020. Restorative and regenerative: Exploring the concepts in the circular economy. J. Ind. Ecol. 24,
763–773. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12987
Municipality of Amsterdam, 2020a. Amsterdam Circular Strategy 2020-2025 [WWW Document]. URL https://www.
amsterdam.nl/en/policy/sustainability/circular-economy/ (accessed 2.24.22).
Municipality of Amsterdam, 2020b. Amsterdam Circular Monitor. Amsterdam.
Municipality of Amsterdam, 2020c. The Amsterdam City Doughnut: A Tool For Transformative Action. Amsterdam.
Municipality of Amsterdam, 2020d. Amsterdam Circulair 2020–2025 Innovatie- en Uitvoeringsprogramma 2020–
2021. Amsterdam.
Municipality of Copenhagen, 2019. Circular Copenhagen Resource and Waste Management Plan 2024.
Murray, A., Skene, K., Haynes, K., 2017. The Circular Economy: An Interdisciplinary Exploration of the Concept and
Application in a Global Context. J. Bus. Ethics 140, 369–380. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-015-2693-2
Myhre, M., MacKillop, D.A., 2002. Rubber Recycling. Rubber Chem. Technol. 75, 429–474. https://doi.
org/10.5254/1.3547678
Myhre, M., Saiwari, S., Dierkes, W., Noordermeer, J., 2012. Rubber Recycling: Chemistry, processing, and applications.
Rubber Chem. Technol. 85, 408–449. https://doi.org/10.5254/rct.12.87973
Nadal, A., 2013. Obesity: Fat from plastics? Linking bisphenol a exposure and obesity. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. https://
doi.org/10.1038/nrendo.2012.205
Næss, A., Rothernberg, D., 1989. Ecology, community, and lifestyle : outline of an ecosophy. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Naustdalslid, J., 2014. Circular economy in China - The environmental dimension of the harmonious society. Int. J.
Sustain. Dev. World Ecol. 21, 303–313. https://doi.org/10.1080/13504509.2014.914599
Ness, D., 2022. Beyond circularity. Do we need to shrink and share?, in: Pál, V. (Ed.), Social and Cultural Aspects of the
Circular Economy. Routledge, pp. 194–208. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003255246-12
Ness, D., 2021. The Elephant in the COP26 Room, in: Environment Humanities 02.11.2021, Helsinki, Finland. https://
doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.24466.17600
Newsholme, A., Deutz, P., Affolderbach, J., Baumgartner, R.J., 2022. Negotiating Stakeholder Relationships in a
Regional Circular Economy: Discourse Analysis of Multi-scalar Policies and Company Statements from the
North of England. Circ. Econ. Sustain. 2, 783–809. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43615-021-00143-9
Nielsen, T.D., Hasselbalch, J., Holmberg, K., Stripple, J., 2020. Politics and the plastic crisis: A review throughout the
plastic life cycle. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Energy Environ. 9, e360. https://doi.org/10.1002/wene.360

228

Bibliography
Nieto, J., Carpintero, Ó., Miguel, L.J., de Blas, I., 2019. Macroeconomic modelling under energy constraints: Global
low carbon transition scenarios. Energy Policy 111090. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2019.111090
Niles, M.T., Ahuja, R., Barker, T., Esquivel, J., Gutterman, S., Heller, M.C., Mango, N., Portner, D., Raimond, R., Tirado, C.,
Vermeulen, S., 2018. Climate change mitigation beyond agriculture: A review of food system opportunities
and implications. Renew. Agric. Food Syst. 33, 297–308. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1742170518000029
Nirmal, P., Rocheleau, D., 2019. Decolonizing degrowth in the post-development convergence: Questions,
experiences, and proposals from two Indigenous territories. Environ. Plan. E Nat. Sp. 2, 465–492. https://doi.
org/10.1177/2514848618819478
Núñez-Cacho, P., Leyva-Díaz, J.C., Sánchez-Molina, J., van der Gun, R., 2020. Plastics and sustainable purchase
decisions in a circular economy: The case of Dutch food industry. PLoS One 15, e0239949. https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0239949
Nylén, E.J.A., Salminen, J.M., 2019. How does the circular economy discourse affect policy-making? The case of
streamlining waste utilisation in Finnish earthworks. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 149, 532–540. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.06.029
O’Neill, D.W., Fanning, A.L., Lamb, W.F., Steinberger, J.K., 2018. A good life for all within planetary boundaries. Nat.
Sustain. 1, 88–95. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-018-0021-4
Observatory of Utopic Perspectives, 2019. L’Observatoire des Perspectives Utopiques, Rapport d’analyse.
Odoxa, 2019. Les Français, plus « écolos » que jamais [WWW Document]. URL http://www.odoxa.fr/sondage/
barometre-economique-doctobre-francais-plus-ecolos-jamais/ (accessed 5.31.22).
OECD, 2018. Realising the Circular Bioeconomy. Paris.
OECD, 2004. Biotechnology for sustainable growth and development. Paris.
Ortega Alvarado, I.A., Sutcliffe, T.E., Berker, T., Pettersen, I.N., 2021. Emerging circular economies: Discourse coalitions
in a Norwegian case. Sustain. Prod. Consum. 26, 360–372. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2020.10.011
Ortíz-Rodríguez, O.O., Ocampo-Duque, W., Duque-Salazar, L.I., 2017. Environmental impact of end-of-life tires: Life
cycle assessment comparison of three scenarios from a case study in Valle Del Cauca, Colombia. Energies 10,
2117. https://doi.org/10.3390/en10122117
Paez, A., 2017. Gray literature: An important resource in systematic reviews. J. Evid. Based. Med. 10, 233–240. https://
doi.org/10.1111/jebm.12266
Paiho, S., Mäki, E., Wessberg, N., Paavola, M., Tuominen, P., Antikainen, M., Heikkilä, J., Rozado, C.A., Jung, N.,
2020. Towards circular cities—Conceptualizing core aspects. Sustain. Cities Soc. 59, 102143. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scs.2020.102143
Palm, E., Hasselbalch, J., Holmberg, K., Nielsen, T.D., 2021. Narrating plastics governance: policy narratives in the
European plastics strategy. Env. Polit. 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1080/09644016.2021.1915020
Pansera, M., Genovese, A., Ripa, M., 2021. Politicising Circular Economy: what can we learn from Responsible
Innovation? J. Responsible Innov. 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1080/23299460.2021.1923315
Papanek, V., 1972. Design for the real world. Academy, Chicago.
Pardo, R., Schweitzer, J.P., 2018. A long-term strategy for a European circular economy-setting the course for
success. Brussels.
Park, J., Díaz-Posada, N., Mejía-Dugand, S., 2018. Challenges in implementing the extended producer responsibility
in an emerging economy: The end-of-life tire management in Colombia. J. Clean. Prod. 189, 754–762. https://
doi.org/10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2018.04.058
Parrique, T., Barth, J., Briens, F., Kerschner, C., Kraus-Polk, A., Kuokkanen, A., Spangenberg, J.., 2019. Decoupling
debunked: Evidence and arguments against green growth as a sole strategy for sustainability. Brussels.
Pauli, G.A., 2010. The blue economy : 10 years, 100 innovations, 100 million jobs. Paradigm Publications, Taos, New
Mexico, USA.
Pearce, D.W., Turner, R.K., 1989. Economics of Natural Resources and the Environment. Johns Hopkins University
Press, Baltimore.
Persson, L., Almroth, B.M.C., Collins, C.D., Cornell, S., Wit, C.A. De, Diamond, M.L., Fantke, P., Hassell, M., Macleod, M.,
Ryberg, M.W., Jørgensen, P.S., Villarrubia-g, P., Wang, Z., Hauschild, M.Z., 2022. Outside the Safe Operating
Space of the Planetary Boundary for Novel Entities. Environ. Sci. Technol. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
est.1c04158

229

Bibliography
Peterson, M.K., Lemay, J.C., Pacheco Shubin, S., Prueitt, R.L., 2018. Comprehensive multipathway risk assessment
of chemicals associated with recycled (“crumb”) rubber in synthetic turf fields. Environ. Res. 160, 256–268.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2017.09.019
Petit-Boix, A., Leipold, S., 2018. Circular economy in cities: Reviewing how environmental research aligns with local
practices. J. Clean. Prod. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.05.281
Phillips, M.E., 2020. Reconnecting with nature: an ecofeminist view of environmental management. Geogr. Res. 58,
154–166. https://doi.org/10.1111/1745-5871.12388
Picuno, C., Eygen, E. Van, Brouwer, M.T., Kuchta, K., Velzen, E.U.T. van, 2021. Factors Shaping the Recycling Systems
for Plastic Packaging Waste—A Comparison between Austria, Germany and The Netherlands. Sustain. 2021,
Vol. 13, Page 6772 13, 6772. https://doi.org/10.3390/SU13126772
Piketty, T., 2019. Capital et idéologie. Seuil, Paris.
Pla-Julián, I., Guevara, S., 2019. Is circular economy the key to transitioning towards sustainable development?
Challenges from the perspective of care ethics. Futures 105, 67–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
futures.2018.09.001
Plastic Pact NL, 2021. More with less plastic | Plastic Pact Netherlands [WWW Document]. URL https://www.
meermetminderplastic.nl/ (accessed 8.18.21).
PlasticEurope, 2020. Plastics – the Facts 2020, An analysis of European plastics production, demand and waste data.
Polak, F., 1973. The image of the future. Elsevier Sdentific Publishing Company, Amsterdam.
Poland, B., Buse, C., Antze, P., Haluza-DeLay, R., Ling, C., Newman, L., Parent, A.A., Teelucksingh, C., Cohen, R., Hasdell,
R., Hayes, K., Massot, S., Zook, M., 2019. The emergence of the transition movement in Canada: success and
impact through the eyes of initiative leaders. Local Environ. 24, 180–200. https://doi.org/10.1080/13549839
.2018.1555579
Pollex, J., Lenschow, A., 2018. Surrendering to growth? The European Union’s goals for research and technology in
the Horizon 2020 framework. J. Clean. Prod. 197, 1863–1871. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.10.195
Pomponi, F., Moncaster, A., 2017. Circular economy for the built environment: A research framework. J. Clean. Prod.
143, 710–718. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.12.055
Pope Francis, 2015. Encyclical Letter Laudato Si’ of the Holy Father Francis on Care for Our Common Home. Vatican
Press, Vatican City.
Prendeville, S., Cherim, E., Bocken, N., 2018. Circular Cities: Mapping Six Cities in Transition. Environ. Innov. Soc.
Transitions 26, 171–194. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2017.03.002
Prieto-Sandoval, V., Jaca, C., Ormazabal, M., 2018. Towards a consensus on the circular economy. J. Clean. Prod. 179,
605–615. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.12.224
Qi, J., Zhao, J., Li, W., Peng, X., Wu, B., Wang, H., 2016. Origin and Background of Circular Economy Development, in:
Development of Circular Economy in China. Springer, Singapore, pp. 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-98110-2466-5_1
Rademaekers, K., Smith, M., Yearwood, J., Saheb, Y., Moerenhout, J., Pollier, K., Debrosses, N., Badouard, T., Peffen,
A., Pollitt, H., Heald, S., Altman, M., 2018. Study on Energy Prices, Costs and Subsidies and their Impact on
Industry and Households. Brussels. https://doi.org/10.2833/825966
Ragaert, K., Delva, L., Van Geem, K., 2017. Mechanical and chemical recycling of solid plastic waste. Waste Manag.
69, 24–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2017.07.044
Rammelt, C., 2020. The spiralling economy: Connecting marxian theory with ecological economics. Environ. Values
29, 417–442. https://doi.org/10.3197/096327119X15747870303881
Rammelt, C.F., Crisp, P.T., 2014. A systems and thermodynamics perspective on technology in the circular economy.
Real-World Econ. Rev. 25–40.
Raworth, K., 2017. Doughnut economics : seven ways to think like a 21st-century economist. Random House UK,
London, UK.
RecyBEM B.V., 2019. Organisatie Band en Milieu [WWW Document]. URL https://www.recybem.nl/nl/overrecybem/organisatie (accessed 10.22.19).
Reid Ross, A., Bevensee, E., 2020. Confronting the Rise of Eco-Fascism Means Grappling with Complex Systems,
CARR Research Insight. London, UK.

230

Bibliography
Reike, D., Vermeulen, W.J.V., Witjes, S., 2018a. The circular economy: New or Refurbished as CE 3.0? — Exploring
Controversies in the Conceptualization of the Circular Economy through a Focus on History and
Resource Value Retention Options. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 135, 246–264. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
resconrec.2017.08.027
Reike, D., Vermeulen, W.J.V., Witjes, S., 2018b. The circular economy: New or Refurbished as CE 3.0? — Exploring
Controversies in the Conceptualization of the Circular Economy through a Focus on History and
Resource Value Retention Options. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 135, 246–264. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
resconrec.2017.08.027
Repo, P., Anttonen, M., Mykkänen, J., Lammi, M., 2018. Lack of Congruence between European Citizen Perspectives
and Policies on Circular Economy. Eur. J. Sustain. Dev. 7, 249–264. https://doi.org/10.14207/ejsd.2018.
v7n1p249
Reuter, M.A., van Schaik, A., Gutzmer, J., Bartie, N., Abadías-Llamas, A., 2019. Challenges of the Circular
Economy: A Material, Metallurgical, and Product Design Perspective. Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 49, annurevmatsci-070218-010057. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-matsci-070218-010057
Reynaud, E., Fulconis, F., Paché, G., 2019. Agro-ecology in action: The environmental oasis projects. Environ. Econ.
10, 66–78. https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.21511/ee.10(1).2019.05
Rifkin, J., 2013. The third industrial revolution : how lateral power is transforming energy, the economy, and the
world. Palgrave Macmillan, New York.
Riggio, J., Baillie, J.E.M., Brumby, S., Ellis, E., Kennedy, C.M., Oakleaf, J.R., Tait, A., Tepe, T., Theobald, D.M., Venter, O.,
Watson, J.E.M., Jacobson, A.P., 2020. Global human influence maps reveal clear opportunities in conserving
Earth’s remaining intact terrestrial ecosystems. Glob. Chang. Biol. 26, 4344–4356. https://doi.org/10.1111/
gcb.15109
Rijnhout, L., Stoczkiewicz, M., Bolger, M., 2018. Necessities for a Resource Efficient Europe, in: Lehmann, H. (Ed.),
Factor X Challenges, Implementation Strategies and Examples for a Sustainable Use of Natural Resources.
Springer, Cham, pp. 13–30. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-50079-9_2
Rinzin, C., 2006. On the middle path: The social basis for sustainable development in Bhutan. Ned. Geogr. Stud.
1–204.
Rinzin, C., Vermeulen, W.J.V., Glasbergen, P., 2007. Public perceptions of Bhutan’s approach to sustainable
development in practice. Sustain. Dev. 15, 52–68. https://doi.org/10.1002/sd.293
Rist, S., Carney Almroth, B., Hartmann, N.B., Karlsson, T.M., 2018. A critical perspective on early communications
concerning human health aspects of microplastics. Sci. Total Environ. 626, 720–726. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
SCITOTENV.2018.01.092
RIVM, 2017. Evaluation of health risks of playing sports on synthetic turf pitches with rubber granulate. Bilthoven,
Netherlands. https://doi.org/10.21945/RIVM-2017-0016
Robèrt, K.-H., 2002. The natural step story : seeding a quiet revolution. New Society Publishers, Gabriola Island,
Canada.
Roberts, J., 2017. The new economy puts people and planet first. Environ. Pract. 19, 112–114. https://doi.org/10.10
80/14660466.2017.1330506
Rockström, J., Steffen, W., Noone, K., Persson, Å., Chapin III, F.S., Lambin, E.F., Lenton, T.M., Scheffer, M., Folke, C.,
Schellnhuber, H.J., Nykvist, B., de Wit, C.A., Hughes, T., van der Leeuw, S., Rodhe, H., Sörlin, S., Snyder, P.K.,
Costanza, R., Svedin, U., Falkenmark, M., Karlberg, L., Corell, R.W., Fabry, V.J., Hansen, J., Walker, B., Liverman,
D., Richardson, K., Crutzen, P., Foley, J.A., others, 2009. A safe operating space for humanity. Nature 461, 472.
Rogers, D.S., Tibben-Lembke, R.S., 1998. Going backwards: reverse logistics trends and practices. Reverse Logistics
Executive Council.
Rogers, H.A., Deutz, P., Ramos, T.B., 2021. Repairing the circular economy: Public perception and participant
profile of the repair economy in Hull, UK. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 168, 105447. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
resconrec.2021.105447
Roos Lindgreen, E., Salomone, R., Reyes, T., 2020. A critical review of academic approaches, methods and tools to
assess circular economy at the micro level. Sustain. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12124973
Røpke, I., 2019. Sustainability Transitions from an Ecological Economic Perspective. Ecol. Econ. Soc. INSEE J. 2, 3–8.
Røpke, I., 2016. Complementary system perspectives in ecological macroeconomics - The example of transition
investments during the crisis. Ecol. Econ. 121, 237–245. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2015.03.018

231

Bibliography
Ruiz-Alejos, C., Prats, V., 2021. In quest of implementing degrowth in local urban planning policies. Local Environ.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13549839.2021.1983789
Ryan, C.J., Hosken, M., Greene, D., 1992. EcoDesign: design and the response to the greening of the international
market. Des. Stud. 13, 3–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/0142-694X(92)80002-G
Saavedra, Y.M.B., Iritani, D.R., Pavan, A.L.R., Ometto, A.R., 2018. Theoretical contribution of industrial ecology to
circular economy. J. Clean. Prod. 170, 1514–1522. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.09.260
Saiwari, S., Dierkes, W.K., Noordermeer, J.W.M., 2019. Recycling of Individual Waste Rubbers. Green Chem. Ser. No. 59
Rubber Recycl. Challenges Dev. 186–232. https://doi.org/10.1039/9781788010849-00001
Sánchez-Cuenca, I., 2017. From a Deficit of Democracy to a Technocratic Order: The Postcrisis Debate on Europe.
Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 20, 351–369. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-polisci-061915-110623
Santa-Maria, T., Diaz, A., Delgadillo, E., Vermeulen, W.J. V, Reyes, T., Baumgartner, R.J., 2021a. Is Design Thinking an
effective method to generate circular economy based solutions in a socially distanced world ? Experiences
from an online Design Thinking workshop. Proc. 4th PLATE 2021 Conf.
Santa-Maria, T., Vermeulen, W.J.V., Baumgartner, R.J., 2021b. Framing and assessing the emergent field of business
model innovation for the circular economy: A combined literature review and multiple case study approach.
Sustain. Prod. Consum. 26, 872–891. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2020.12.037
Särkilahti, M., Åkerman, M., Jokinen, A., Rintala, J., 2021. Temporal challenges of building a circular city district
through living-lab experiments. Eur. Plan. Stud. 1–22. https://doi.org/10.1080/09654313.2021.1965963
Saunders, M.N.K., Rojon, C., 2011. On the attributes of a critical literature review. Coaching 4, 156–162. https://doi.
org/10.1080/17521882.2011.596485
Savini, F., 2021a. The circular economy of waste: recovery, incineration and urban reuse. J. Environ. Plan. Manag. 64,
2114–2132. https://doi.org/10.1080/09640568.2020.1857226
Savini, F., 2021b. Towards an urban degrowth: Habitability, finity and polycentric autonomism. Environ. Plan. A.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0308518X20981391
Savini, F., 2019. The economy that runs on waste: accumulation in the circular city. J. Environ. Policy Plan. 21, 675–
691. https://doi.org/10.1080/1523908X.2019.1670048
Scharmer, O., Kaufer, K., 2013. Leading from the Emerging Future: From Ego-System to Eco-System Economies.
Berrett-Koehler Publishers, San Francisco, California, United States.
Scheidel, A., Del Bene, D., Liu, J., Navas, G., Mingorría, S., Demaria, F., Avila, S., Roy, B., Ertör, I., Temper, L., MartínezAlier, J., 2020. Environmental conflicts and defenders: A global overview. Glob. Environ. Chang. 63. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2020.102104
Schneider, P., Meyer, A., Plat, K., 2019. Potential of bioeconomy in urban green infrastructure. Bioeconomy Sustain.
Dev. 251–276. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-9431-7_13
Schratzenstaller, M., Krenek, A., 2019. Tax-based Own Resources to Finance the EU Budget Potential Revenues,
Summary Evaluation from a Sustainability Perspective, and Implementation Aspects.
Schröder, P., Anantharaman, M., Anggraeni, K., Foxon, T.J., Barber, J., 2019a. Introduction: Sustainable lifestyles,
livelihoods and the circular economy, in: The Circular Economy and the Global South. Routledge, pp. 3–22.
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429434006-1
Schröder, P., Bengtsson, M., Cohen, M., Dewick, P., Hoffstetter, J., Sarkis, J., 2019b. Degrowth within – Aligning
circular economy and strong sustainability narratives. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 146, 190–191. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.RESCONREC.2019.03.038
Schröder, P., Dewick, P., Kusi-Sarpong, S., Hofstetter, J.S., 2018. Circular economy and power relations in global value
chains: Tensions and trade-offs for lower income countries. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
resconrec.2018.04.003
Schröder, P., Lemille, A., Desmond, P., 2020. Making the circular economy work for human development. Resour.
Conserv. Recycl. 156. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2020.104686
Schroeder, P., Anggraeni, K., Weber, U., 2019. The Relevance of Circular Economy Practices to the Sustainable
Development Goals. J. Ind. Ecol. 23, 77–95. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12732
Schumacher, E.F., 1973. Small is beautiful a study of economics as if people mattered,. Blond & Briggs, New York.
Schwartz, P., Randall, D., 2003. An Abrupt Climate Change Scenario and Its Implications for United States National
Security. Washington, DC.

232

Bibliography
Schwarz, M., Thompson, M. (Michael), 1990. Divided we stand : redefining politics, technology, and social choice.
University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
Scott, E., 2015. End-of-life Tyre REPORT, European Tyre & Rubber Manufacturers Association, 2015.
Scottish Government, 2016. Making Things Last: a circular economy strategy for Scotland. Glasgow.
Scown, M.W., Brady, M. V., Nicholas, K.A., 2020. Billions in Misspent EU Agricultural Subsidies Could Support the
Sustainable Development Goals. One Earth 3, 237–250. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2020.07.011
Shah, S.H., Rodina, L., Burt, J.M., Gregr, E.J., Chapman, M., Williams, S., Wilson, N.J., McDowell, G., 2018. Unpacking
social-ecological transformations: Conceptual, ethical and methodological insights. Anthr. Rev. 5, 250–265.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2053019618817928
Shumba, O., 2011. Commons thinking, ecological intelligence and the ethical and moral framework of Ubuntu: An
imperative for sustainable development. J. Media Commun. Stud. 3, 84–96.
Sienkiewicz, M., Kucinska-Lipka, J., Janik, H., Balas, A., 2012. Progress in used tyres management in the European
Union: A review. Waste Manag. 32, 1742–1751. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2012.05.010
Silva, A., Stocker, L., Mercieca, P., Rosano, M., 2016. The role of policy labels, keywords and framing in transitioning
waste policy. J. Clean. Prod. 115, 224–237. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.12.069
Simoens, M.C., Leipold, S., 2021. Trading radical for incremental change: the politics of a circular economy transition
in the German packaging sector. J. Environ. Policy Plan. 23, 822–836. https://doi.org/10.1080/152390
8X.2021.1931063
Simon, B., 2019. What are the most significant aspects of supporting the circular economy in the plastic industry?
Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 141, 299–300. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2018.10.044
Sitas, R., 2020. Creative Cities, Graffiti and Culture-Led Development in South Africa: Dlala Indima (‘Play Your Part’).
Int. J. Urban Reg. Res. 44, 821–840. https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-2427.12894
Skene, K.R., 2018. Circles, spirals, pyramids and cubes: Why the circular economy cannot work. Sustain. Sci. 13,
479–492. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-017-0443-3
Snyder, H., 2019. Literature review as a research methodology: An overview and guidelines. J. Bus. Res. 104, 333–
339. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.07.039
Social Circular Economy, 2017. Social Circular Economy – opportunities for people, planet and profit.
Song, L., 2016. Enabling transformative agency: community-based green economic and workforce development
in LA and Cleveland. Plan. Theory Pract. 17, 227–243. https://doi.org/10.1080/14649357.2016.1158307
Spanier, J., Feola, G., 2022. Nurturing the post-growth city: bringing the rural back in, in: Savini, F., Ferreira, A., von
Schönfeld, K.C. (Eds.), Post-Growth Planning: Cities beyond the Market Economy. Routledge, pp. 1–23.
Spash, C.L., 2020. A tale of three paradigms: Realising the revolutionary potential of ecological economics. Ecol.
Econ. 169. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2019.106518
Spicer, A.J., Johnson, M.R., 2004. Third-party demanufacturing as a solution for extended producer responsibility. J.
Clean. Prod. 12, 37–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-6526(02)00182-8
Spiegelhalter, T., Arch, R.A., 2010. Biomimicry and circular metabolism for the cities of the future. WIT Trans. Ecol.
Environ. 129, 215–226. https://doi.org/10.2495/SC100191
Springmann, M., Clark, M., Mason-D’Croz, D., Wiebe, K., Bodirsky, B.L., Lassaletta, L., de Vries, W., Vermeulen, S.J.,
Herrero, M., Carlson, K.M., Jonell, M., Troell, M., DeClerck, F., Gordon, L.J., Zurayk, R., Scarborough, P., Rayner,
M., Loken, B., Fanzo, J., Godfray, H.C.J., Tilman, D., Rockström, J., Willett, W., 2018. Options for keeping the food
system within environmental limits. Nature 562, 519–525. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0594-0
Stafford, R., Jones, P.J.S., 2019. Viewpoint – Ocean plastic pollution: A convenient but distracting truth? Mar. Policy
103, 187–191. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MARPOL.2019.02.003
Stahel, W.R., 2016. The circular economy. Nature 531, 435–438. https://doi.org/10.1038/531435a
Stahel, W.R., 2010. The Performance Economy, second. ed. Palgrave Macmillan, New York (USA).
Stake, R.E., 2005. Qualitative Case Studies, in: Denzin, N.K., Lincoln, Y.S. (Eds.), The Sage Handbook of Qualitative
Research. Sage Publications, pp. 443–466.
Steenmans, K., 2019. Extended producer responsibility: an assessment of recent amendments to the european
union waste framework directive. LEAD Law Environ. Dev. J. 15, 110–123.

233

Bibliography
Steffen, W., Richardson, K., Rockström, J., Cornell, S.E., Fetzer, I., Bennett, E.M., Biggs, R., Carpenter, S.R., De Vries,
W., De Wit, C.A., Folke, C., Gerten, D., Heinke, J., Mace, G.M., Persson, L.M., Ramanathan, V., Reyers, B., Sörlin,
S., 2015. Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet. Science (80-. ). 347,
1259855–1259855. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1259855
Steffen, W., Rockströma, J., Richardson, K., Lentond, T.M., Folke, C., Liverman, D., Summerhayes, C.P., Barnosky, A.D.,
Cornell, S.E., Crucifix, M., Donges, J.F., Fetzer, I., Lade, S.J., Schellnhuber, H.J., 2018. Trajectories of the Earth
System in the Anthropocene. PNAS 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1810141115/-/DCSupplemental
Stegemann, L., Ossewaarde, M., 2018. A sustainable myth: A neo-Gramscian perspective on the populist and
post-truth tendencies of the European green growth discourse. Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 43, 25–32. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.erss.2018.05.015
Stevels, A., Smit, E., 2019. The history of the take-back and treatment of consumer waste electrical and electronic
equipment at philips, in: Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) Handbook. Woodhead Publishing,
pp. 647–669. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-102158-3.00024-0
Stevenson, H., 2015. Contemporary Discourses of Green Political Economy: A Q Method Analysis. J. Environ. Policy
Plan. 21, 533–548. https://doi.org/10.1080/1523908X.2015.1118681
Stewart, J., 2012. Multiple-case Study Methods in Governance-related Research. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/147190
37.2011.589618 14, 67–82. https://doi.org/10.1080/14719037.2011.589618
Stiegler, B., Ross, D., 2018. The Neganthropocene, CCC2 Irreversibility.
Stiglitz, J.E., 2012. The Price of Inequality. W.W. Norton & Company, New York.
Stoll-Kleemann, S., Schmidt, U.J., 2017. Reducing meat consumption in developed and transition countries to
counter climate change and biodiversity loss: a review of influence factors. Reg. Environ. Chang. 17, 1261–
1277. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10113-016-1057-5
STOWA, 2018. RUBBER-GRANULAAT OP KUNST-GRASVELDEN. Amersfort, Netherlands.
Stumpf, L., Schöggl, J.P., Baumgartner, R.J., 2021. Climbing up the circularity ladder? – A mixed-methods analysis
of circular economy in business practice. J. Clean. Prod. 316. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.128158
Su, Y., Duan, H., Wang, Z., Song, G., Kang, P., Chen, D., 2020. Characterizing the environmental impact of packaging
materials for express delivery via life cycle assessment. J. Clean. Prod. 274, 122961. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
JCLEPRO.2020.122961
Suárez-Eiroa, B., Fernández, E., Méndez-Martínez, G., Soto-Oñate, D., 2019. Operational principles of circular
economy for sustainable development: Linking theory and practice. J. Clean. Prod. 214, 952–961. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.12.271
Subramanian, N., Gunasekaran, A., Wu, L., Shen, T., 2018. Role of traditional Chinese philosophies and new product
development under circular economy in private manufacturing enterprise performance. Int. J. Prod. Res.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1530467
Subtirelu, N.C., Baker, P., 2017. Corpus-based approaches, in: The Routledge Handbook of Critical Discourse Studies.
Routledge, pp. 106–119. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315739342
Suh, S., Bergesen, J.D., Gibon, T., Hertwich, E.G., Taptich, M., 2017. Green Technology Choices: The Environmental and
Resource Implications of Low-Carbon Technologies. Nairobi, Kenya.
Sutton, S.A., 2019. Cooperative cities: Municipal support for worker cooperatives in the United States. J. Urban Aff.
41, 1081–1102. https://doi.org/10.1080/07352166.2019.1584531
Syberg, K., Nielsen, M.B., Westergaard Clausen, L.P., van Calster, G., van Wezel, A., Rochman, C., Koelmans, A.A., Cronin,
R., Pahl, S., Hansen, S.F., 2021. Regulation of plastic from a circular economy perspective. Curr. Opin. Green
Sustain. Chem. 29, 100462. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogsc.2021.100462
Takahashi, W., 2020. Economic rationalism or administrative rationalism? Curbside collection systems in Sweden
and Japan. J. Clean. Prod. 242. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.118288
Talens Peiró, L., Polverini, D., Ardente, F., Mathieux, F., 2020. Advances towards circular economy policies in the
EU: The new Ecodesign regulation of enterprise servers. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 154, 104426. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.104426
Tate, W.L., Bals, L., Bals, C., Foerstl, K., 2019. Seeing the forest and not the trees: Learning from nature’s circular
economy. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 149, 115–129. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.05.023
Teixidó-Figueras, J., Steinberger, J.K., Krausmann, F., Haberl, H., Wiedmann, T., Peters, G.P., Duro, J.A., Kastner, T., 2016.
International inequality of environmental pressures: Decomposition and comparative analysis. Ecol. Indic.
62, 163–173. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2015.11.041

234

Bibliography
Temesgen, A., Storsletten, V., Jakobsen, O., 2019. Circular Economy – Reducing Symptoms or Radical Change?
Philos. Manag. 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40926-019-00112-1
Thapa, K., Vermeulen, W.J., Deutz, P., Olayide, O., 2022a. Transboundary movement of waste review: From
binary towards a contextual framing. Waste Manag. Res. J. a Sustain. Circ. Econ. 1–16. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0734242X221105424
Thapa, K., Vermeulen, W.J.V., Deutz, P., 2022b. Science with society: Challenges of early-stage researchers engaging
with transdisciplinary research in sustainability science. Sustain. Dev. 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1002/sd.2328
Thomas, C., Gosink, E., 2021. At the intersection of eco-crises, eco-anxiety, and political turbulence: A primer on
twenty-first century ecofascism. Perspect. Glob. Dev. Technol. 20, 30–54. https://doi.org/10.1163/1569149712341581
Thomson, G., Newman, P., 2020. Cities and the Anthropocene: Urban governance for the new era of regenerative
cities. Urban Stud. 57, 1502–1519. https://doi.org/10.1177/0042098018779769
Thomson, G., Newman, P., 2016. Geoengineering in the anthropocene through regenerative urbanism. Geosci. 6.
https://doi.org/10.3390/geosciences6040046
Tibbs, H.B.C., 1993. Industrial ecology: An environmental agenda for industry. Emeryville, CA, USA.
Torretta, V., Rada, E.C., Ragazzi, M., Trulli, E., Istrate, I.A., Cioca, L.I., 2015. Treatment and disposal of tyres: Two EU
approaches. A review. Waste Manag. 45, 152–160. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2015.04.018
Trainer, T., Alexander, S., 2019. The simpler way: envisioning a sustainable society in an age of limits. real-world Econ.
Rev. 87, 247–260.
Turner, G.M., 2014. Is global collapse imminent? MSSI Res. Pap. https://doi.org/978 0 7340 4940 7
UN, 1992. Rio Declaration on Environment and Development. The United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
UNEP, 2018. Single-Use Plastics: A Roadmap for Sustainability, Single-use Plastic: A Roadmap for Sustainability.
United Nations Environment Programme and United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), 2021.
Global Environment for Cities-GEO for Cities: Towards Green and Just Cities. UNEP, Nairobi, Kenya.
Unruh, G., 2008. The Biosphere Rules. Harvard Bussiness Rev. 86, 111–117.
Valenzuela, F., Böhm, S., 2017. Against wasted politics: A critique of the circular economy. Ephemer. theory Polit.
Organ. 17, 23–60.
Van den Berghe, K., Vos, M., 2019. Circular area design or circular area functioning? A discourse-institutional analysis
of circular area developments in Amsterdam and Utrecht, The Netherlands. Sustain. 11, 4875. https://doi.
org/10.3390/su11184875
van Egmond, N.D., de Vries, H.J.M., 2011. Sustainability: The search for the integral worldview. Futures 43, 853–867.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2011.05.027
van Leeuwen, K., de Vries, E., Koop, S., Roest, K., 2018. The Energy & Raw Materials Factory: Role and Potential
Contribution to the Circular Economy of the Netherlands. Environ. Manage. 61, 786–795. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00267-018-0995-8
Vanhuyse, F., Haddaway, N.R., Henrysson, M., 2021. Circular cities: an evidence map of research between 2010 and
2020. Discov. Sustain. 2021 21 2, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1007/S43621-021-00059-2
Velenturf, A.P.M., Purnell, P., 2021. Principles for a sustainable circular economy. Sustain. Prod. Consum. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.spc.2021.02.018
Velis, C., 2018. No circular economy if current systemic failures are not addressed. Waste Manag. Res. 36, 757–759.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0734242X18799579
Venkata Mohan, S., Amulya, K., Annie Modestra, J., 2020. Urban biocycles – Closing metabolic loops for resilient
and regenerative ecosystem: A perspective. Bioresour. Technol. 306, 123098. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biortech.2020.123098
Verma, R., 2017. Gross National Happiness: meaning, measure and degrowth in a living development alternative. J.
Polit. Ecol. 24, 476. https://doi.org/10.2458/v24i1.20885
Vermeulen, W.J.., Backes, C.., de Munck, M.C.., Campbell-Johnston, K., de Waal, I.., Rosales Carreon, J., Boeve, M.., 2021.
WHITE PAPER on Pathways for Extended Producer Responsibility on the road to a Circular Economy. Utrecht.
Vermeulen, W.J.V., 2018. Substantiating the rough consensus on concept of sustainable development as point of
departure for indicator development, in: Bell, S., Morse, S. (Eds.), Handbook of Sustainability Indicators and
Indices (Chapter 4). Routledge/CRC Press, pp. 1–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.med.2017.05.002

235

Bibliography
Vermeulen, W.J.V., 2015. Self-governance for sustainable global supply chains: Can it deliver the impacts needed?
Bus. Strateg. Environ. 24, 73–85. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.1804
Vermeulen, W.J.V., Reike, D., Witjes, S., 2018. Circular Economy 3.0: Getting Beyond the Messy Conceptualization of
Circularity and the 3R’s, 4R’s and More …, in: CEC4Europe Publications. pp. 1–6.
Vermeulen, W.J.V., van der Waals, Jochem F. M., Ernste, H., Glasbergen, P., Waals, J.F.M. van der, Glasbergen, P.,
Ernste, H., 1997. Duurzaamheid als uitdaging: de afweging van ecologische en maatschappelijke risico’s in
confrontatie en dialoog, WRR Voorstudies en achtergronden.
Vermeulen, W.J.V., Weterings, R.P.M., 1997. Extended Producer Responsibility: Moving from end-of-life management
towards public-private commitment to innovation in product life-cycles. J. Clean Technol. Environ. Toxicol.
Occup. Med. 6, 283–298.
Vermeulen, W.J.V., Witjes, S., 2020. History and mapping of transdisciplinary research on sustainable development
issues, in: Transdisciplinarity For Sustainability. Routledge, pp. 6–26. https://doi.org/10.4324/97804291991272
Verrips, A., Hoogendoorn, S., Jansema-Hoekstra, K., Romijn, G., 2019. The Circular Economy of Plastics in the
Netherlands, in: So, W.W.M., Chow, C.F., Lee, J.C.K. (Eds.), Environmental Sustainability and Education for Waste
Management. Springer Singapore, pp. 43–56. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-9173-6_4
Verschoor, A.J., Bodar, C.W.M., Baumann, R.A., 2018. Verkenning milieueffecten rubbergranulaat bij kunstgrasvelden.
Bilthoven, Nederland.
Verstraeten-Jochemsen, J., Kouloumpi, I., Russell, M., Wit, M. de, Douma, A., Friedl, H., 2018. City-as-a- service.
Amsterdam.
Vetter, A., 2018. The Matrix of Convivial Technology – Assessing technologies for degrowth. J. Clean. Prod. 197,
1778–1786. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.02.195
Vince, J., Hardesty, B.D., 2018. Governance Solutions to the Tragedy of the Commons That Marine Plastics Have
Become. Front. Mar. Sci. 5. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2018.00214
Vita, G., Ivanova, D., Dumitru, A., García-Mira, R., Carrus, G., Stadler, K., Krause, K., Wood, R., Hertwich, E.G., 2020.
Happier with less? Members of European environmental grassroots initiatives reconcile lower carbon
footprints with higher life satisfaction and income increases. Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
erss.2019.101329
Vita, G., Lundström, J.R., Hertwich, E.G., Quist, J., Ivanova, D., Stadler, K., Wood, R., 2019. The Environmental Impact of
Green Consumption and Sufficiency Lifestyles Scenarios in Europe: Connecting Local Sustainability Visions
to Global Consequences. Ecol. Econ. 164, 106322. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2019.05.002
Vohra, K., Vodonos, A., Schwartz, J., Marais, E.A., Sulprizio, M.P., Mickley, L.J., 2021. Global mortality from outdoor fine
particle pollution generated by fossil fuel combustion: Results from GEOS-Chem. Environ. Res. 195, 110754.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENVRES.2021.110754
Völker, T., Kovacic, Z., Strand, R., 2020. Indicator development as a site of collective imagination? The case of
European Commission policies on the circular economy. Cult. Organ. 26, 103–120. https://doi.org/10.1080/
14759551.2019.1699092
Vollmer, I., Jenks, M.J.F., Roelands, M.C.P., White, R.J., van Harmelen, T., de Wild, P., van der Laan, G.P., Meirer, F.,
Keurentjes, J.T.F., Weckhuysen, B.M., 2020. Beyond Mechanical Recycling: Giving New Life to Plastic Waste.
Angew. Chemie - Int. Ed. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201915651
Von Der Leyen, U., 2019. A Union that strives for more My agenda for Europe, POLITICAL GUIDELINES FOR THE NEXT
EUROPEAN COMMISSION 2019-2024. Brussels.
von Weizsäcker, E.U., Wijkman, A., 2017. Come on!: Capitalism, short-termism, population and the destruction of the
planet, Come on!: Capitalism, Short-Termism, Population and the Destruction of the Planet. Springer, New
York. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-7419-1
Vonk, L., 2018. Paying attention to waste: Apple’s circular economy. Continuum (N. Y). 32, 745–757. https://doi.org
/10.1080/10304312.2018.1525923
Voytenko Palgan, Y., Mont, O., Sulkakoski, S., 2021. Governing the sharing economy: Towards a comprehensive
analytical framework of municipal governance. Cities 108, 102994. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cities.2020.102994
Wagner, J., Steinmetzer, S., Theophil, L., Strues, A.-S., Kösegi, N., Hoyer, S., 2022. Evaluation of the collection and
recovery of selected waste streams for the further development of circular economy. Dresden, Germany.

236

Bibliography
Walker, A.M., Opferkuch, K., Roos Lindgreen, E., Raggi, A., Simboli, A., Vermeulen, W.J.V., Caeiro, S., Salomone, R., 2022.
What Is the Relation between Circular Economy and Sustainability? Answers from Frontrunner Companies
Engaged with Circular Economy Practices. Circ. Econ. Sustain. 2, 731–758. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43615021-00064-7
Walker, A.M., Opferkuch, K., Roos Lindgreen, E., Simboli, A., Vermeulen, W.J.V., Raggi, A., 2021. Assessing the social
sustainability of circular economy practices: Industry perspectives from Italy and the Netherlands. Sustain.
Prod. Consum. 27, 831–844. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2021.01.030
Wang-Erlandsson, L., Tobian, A., van der Ent, R.J., Fetzer, I., te Wierik, S., Porkka, M., Staal, A., Jaramillo, F., Dahlmann,
H., Singh, C., Greve, P., Gerten, D., Keys, P.W., Gleeson, T., Cornell, S.E., Steffen, W., Bai, X., Rockström, J., 2022.
A planetary boundary for green water. Nat. Rev. Earth Environ. 2022 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43017022-00287-8
Wang, C., Zhao, L., Lim, M.K., Chen, W.Q., Sutherland, J.W., 2020. Structure of the global plastic waste trade
network and the impact of China’s import Ban. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 153. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
resconrec.2019.104591
Wang, G., Huang, Q., Yuan, J., 2012. Chinese ecovillage practice with cradle to cradle design, in: Applied Mechanics
and Materials. Trans Tech Publications Ltd, pp. 1220–1225. https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scientific.net/
AMM.121-126.1220
Wang, Y.-L., Lee, Y.H., Chiu, I.J., Lin, Y.F., Chiu, H.W., 2020. Potent impact of plastic nanomaterials and micromaterials
on the food chain and human health. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, 1727. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21051727
Ward, J.D., Sutton, P.C., Werner, A.D., Costanza, R., Mohr, S.H., Simmons, C.T., 2016. Is decoupling GDP growth from
environmental impact possible? PLoS One 11, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0164733
Watkins, E., Gionfra, S., Schweitzer, J.-P., Pantzar, M., Janssens, C., ten Brink, P., 2017. EPR in the EU Plastics Strategy and
the Circular Economy: A focus on plastic packaging, Institute for European Environmental Policy.
Watts, S., Stenner, P., 2005. Doing Q methodology: Theory, method and interpretation. Qual. Res. Psychol. 2, 67–91.
https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088705qp022oa
Webler, T., Danielson, S., Tuler, S., 2009. Using Q Method to Reveal Social Perspectives in Environmental Research.
Soc. Environ. Res. 01301, 1–54.
WEF, EMF, McKinsey, 2016. The New Plastics Economy — Rethinking the future of plastics.
Welch, D., Keller, M., Mandich, G., 2017. Imagined futures of everyday life in the circular economy. Interactions 24,
46–51. https://doi.org/10.1145/3047415
WFD 2018/851, 2018. WFD Amendment 2018/851 [WWW Document]. Off. J. Eur. Union.
White, D., 2008. Post-industrial possibilities and urban social ecologies: Bookchin’s legacy. Capital. Nature, Social. 19,
67–81. https://doi.org/10.1080/10455750701859455
Wiedenhofer, D., Virág, D., Kalt, G., Plank, B., Streeck, J., Pichler, M., Mayer, A., Krausmann, F., Brockway, P., Schaffartzik,
A., Fishman, T., Hausknost, D., Leon-Gruchalski, B., Sousa, T., Creutzig, F., Haberl, H., 2020. A systematic review
of the evidence on decoupling of GDP, resource use and GHG emissions, part I: Bibliometric and conceptual
mapping. Environ. Res. Lett. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ab8429
Wiedmann, T., Lenzen, M., Keyßer, L.T., Steinberger, J.K., 2020. Scientists’ warning on affluence. Nat. Commun. 11,
1–10. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-16941-y
Wieliczko, B., 2019. WHAT ROLE FOR THE CAP IN MAKING AGRICULTURE PART OF THE EU CIRCULAR ECONOMY? J.
Agribus. Rural Dev. 53, 273–279–273–279. https://doi.org/10.17306/j.jard.2019.01103
Wiese, A., Kellner, J., Lietke, B., Toporowski, W., Zielke, S., 2012. Sustainability in retailing - a summative content
analysis. Int. J. Retail Distrib. Manag. https://doi.org/10.1108/09590551211211792
Wilkins, J., Murphy, B., 2021. Investing in Degrowth Funding the transition to a new economy.
Williams, J., 2021. Circular cities: What are the benefits of circular development? Sustain. 13, 5725. https://doi.
org/10.3390/su13105725
Williams, J., 2019. Circular cities. Urban Stud. 56, 2746–2762. https://doi.org/10.1177/0042098018806133
Winans, K., Kendall, A., Deng, H., 2017. The history and current applications of the circular economy concept.
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 68, 825–833. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2016.09.123
Winternitz, K., Heggie, M., Baird, J., 2019. Extended producer responsibility for waste tyres in the EU: Lessons
learnt from three case studies – Belgium, Italy and the Netherlands. Waste Manag. 89, 386–396. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.wasman.2019.04.023

237

Bibliography
World Bank, 2022. PovcalNet global poverty figures [WWW Document]. URL http://iresearch.worldbank.org/
PovcalNet/povDuplicateWB.aspx (accessed 1.24.21).
World Bank, 2021. Urban Development Overview [WWW Document]. URL https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/
urbandevelopment/overview (accessed 1.18.21).
Wuttke, J., 2018. The Circular Economy Package of the European Union, in: Lehmann, H. (Ed.), Factor X Challenges,
Implementation Strategies and Examples for a Sustainable Use of Natural Resources. Springer, Cham, pp.
251–262. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-50079-9_15
WWF, 2018. The EU’s long term climate strategy.
Xu, B., Liu, F., Cryder, Z., Huang, D., Lu, Zhijiang, He, Y., Wang, H., Lu, Zhenmei, Brookes, P.C., Tang, C., Gan, J., Xu, J., 2019.
Microplastics in the soil environment: Occurrence, risks, interactions and fate – A review. https://doi.org/10.1
080/10643389.2019.1694822 50, 2175–2222. https://doi.org/10.1080/10643389.2019.1694822
Xue, J., 2021. Urban planning and degrowth: a missing dialogue. Local Environ. https://doi.org/10.1080/1354983
9.2020.1867840
Xue, J., 2014. Is eco-village/urban village the future of a degrowth society? An urban planner’s perspective. Ecol.
Econ. 105, 130–138. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2014.06.003
Yin, K., Wang, Y., Zhao, H., Wang, D., Guo, M., Mu, M., Liu, Y., Nie, X., Li, B., Li, J., Xing, M., 2021. A comparative review
of microplastics and nanoplastics: Toxicity hazards on digestive, reproductive and nervous system. Sci. Total
Environ. 774, 145758. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SCITOTENV.2021.145758
Yin, R.K., 2003. Case Study Research Design and Methods 3rd ed.pd.
Young, S.B., Brady, K., Fava, J., Saur, K., 2001. Eco-efficiency and Materials: Foundation Paper by Five Winds
International. International Council on Metals and the Environment.
Zabala, A., Sandbrook, C., Mukherjee, N., 2018. When and how to use Q methodology to understand perspectives
in conservation research. Conserv. Biol. 32, 1185–1194. https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.13123
Zárate, M.L., 2011. El derecho a la ciudad: luchas urbanas por el buen vivir, in: Series Derechos Humanos Emergentes
7: El Derecho a La Ciudad. Institut de Drets Humans de Catalunya, Barcelona, pp. 53–70.
Zarei, M., Taghipour, H., Hassanzadeh, Y., 2018. Survey of quantity and management condition of end-of-life tires
in Iran: a case study in Tabriz. J. Mater. Cycles Waste Manag. 20, 1099–1105. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10163017-0674-5
Zembla, 2016. Gevaarlijk spel [WWW Document]. Zembla. URL https://www.bnnvara.nl/zembla/artikelen/
gevaarlijk-spel (accessed 10.14.19).
Zhang, W., Li, H., An, X., 2011. Ecological civilization construction is the fundamental way to develop low-carbon
economy, in: Energy Procedia. Elsevier, pp. 839–843. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2011.03.148
Zink, T., Geyer, R., 2017. Circular Economy Rebound. J. Ind. Ecol. 21, 593–602. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12545
Zizek, S., Danta, C., Vardoulakis, D., 2008. Nature and its Discontents. SubStance 37, 37–72. https://doi.org/10.1353/
sub.0.0017
Zwiers, J., Jaeger-Erben, M., Hofmann, F., 2020. Circular literacy. A knowledge-based approach to the circular
economy. Cult. Organ. 26, 121–141. https://doi.org/10.1080/14759551.2019.1709065

238

Publications & other materials

Publications & other materials related to this thesis
Academic publications in this thesis
The following articles were published in academic journals and constitute the content for
chapters 2 to 5 of this thesis.
•

•

•

•

Calisto Friant, M., Vermeulen, W. J., & Salomone, R. (2020). A typology of circular
economy discourses: Navigating the diverse visions of a contested paradigm. Resources,
Conservation and Recycling, 161. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2020.104917
Campbell-Johnston, K., Calisto Friant, M., Thapa, K., Lakerveld, D., & Vermeulen, W. J.
(2020). How circular is your tyre: Experiences with extended producer responsibility
from a circular economy perspective. Journal of Cleaner Production, 270. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.122042
Calisto Friant, M., Vermeulen, W. J., & Salomone, R. (2021). Analysing European
Union circular economy policies: words versus actions. Sustainable Production and
Consumption, 27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2020.11.001
Calisto Friant, M., Lakerveld, D., Vermeulen, W. J., & Salomone, R. (2022). Transition to
a Sustainable Circular Plastics Economy in The Netherlands: Discourse and Policy
Analysis. Sustainability, 14(1), 190. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14010190

Chapter 6 is based on a manuscript under review in the journal Local Environment. It is openly
available online in the Social Science Research Network (SSRN) repository for preprints as:
•

Calisto Friant, M., Reid, K., Boesler, P., Vermeulen, W.J, & Salomone, R., Sustainable Circular
Cities: Analysing Urban Circular Economy Policies in Three European Cities. Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4133478 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4133478

Additional publications connected to this thesis
The following academic and popular science publications were developed in connection to
this thesis and focused either on better-communicating research results or on developing
parallel research activities, in closely related fields and topics.
•

•

Chakori, Sabrina; Ammar Abdul Aziz, Martin Calisto Friant, and Russell Richards (2022)
If the UN wants to slash plastic waste, it must tackle soaring plastic production - and
why we use so much of it. The Conversation, March 2022. https://theconversation.com/
if-the-un-wants-to-slash-plastic-waste-it-must-tackle-soaring-plastic-production-andwhy-we-use-so-much-of-it-179107
Velasco-Herrejón, Paola, Thomas Bauwens, and Martin Calisto Friant. (2022) Challenging
dominant sustainability worldviews on the energy transition: Lessons from Indigenous
communities in Mexico and a plea for pluriversal technologies. World Development
150: 105725. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2021.105725

239

Publications & other materials

•

•

•

Calisto Friant, Martin (2021) The Circular Economy: Societal Transformation or Economic
Fairytale? Revolve Magazine (November 2021) https://revolve.media/the-circulareconomy-societal-transformation-or-economic-fairytale
Calisto Friant, Martin (2020) The circular economy: transformative vision or oxymoronic
illusion? Circular Conversations. (December 2020) https://www.circularconversations.
com/research-series-young-researchers/the-circular-economy-transformative-visionor-oxymoronic-illusion
Calisto Friant, Martin (2019) Deliberating for sustainability: lessons from the Porto Alegre
experiment with participatory budgeting. International Journal of Urban Sustainable
Development 11(1): 81-99. https://doi.org/10.1080/19463138.2019.1570219

Videos connected to this thesis
The following videos were made in the context of this research, they resume research
findings or record specific presentations, conferences or events.
•
•

•
•
•
•

Three Inconvenient Truths About Circular Economy #1: It is about more than just
economy (December 2021): https://youtu.be/FaipZCzSvj0
From a circular economy to a circular society: evolution of the circularity debate, talk
at the 2nd Online Utrecht Degrowth Symposium (15 May 2020): https://youtu.be/cLb7V7MEE4
Circular Society Forum 2021: Building Blocks Of A Circular Society with Martin Calisto
Friant and Melanie Jaeger-Erben (February 2021): https://youtu.be/BKknWZr35Ao
Anticipatory Governance Webinar 12 - A Critical Discussion on the Diverse Discourses
of Circular Economy and Society (May 2021): https://youtu.be/3QxJ8_PYk20
Consulting Without Borders 2022: Degrowth (February 2022): https://youtu.be/
Iukw9SXVUn4
Ontgroei at InVirolution festival 2020: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FwGl8uVkO5U

240

Summary

Summary
The Circular Economy (CE) has recently become a popular concept in sustainability discourses for both the public and private sectors. The proponents of this idea often espouse
many social, economic, and environmental benefits from the application of CE practices.
Given current socio-ecological challenges to overcome resource scarcity, climate change,
and biodiversity loss, all while reducing global poverty and inequality, the CE could provide
key solutions and opportunities for a transition to a sustainable, fair, and resilient future.
However, the CE faces many limitations to deliver on those expectations. The CE is very
much a contested concept in the sustainability discourse with many actors proposing different visions of a circular future based on their particular socio-economic interests. Moreover, the economic, social, political, and environmental implications of different circular discourses and policies remain poorly researched and understood.
This thesis addresses this research gap by answering the following question: what are the
main societal discourses and policies on the CE, how can they be critically analysed, compared, and understood, and what are their sustainability implications? To answer this question, this thesis uses an interdisciplinary mixed-method approach including critical literature
review, content analysis, text-mining, and Q-method survey. The case studies are European
Union CE policies, Dutch CE policies for plastics and tyres as well as the CE action plans of
Amsterdam, Copenhagen and Glasgow.
Results demonstrate the existence of a plurality of circularity discourses through history,
which can be divided based on two main criteria. First, whether they are sceptical or optimist
regarding the possibility of eco-economic decoupling, and second, whether they are holistic by including social justice concerns or have a segmented focus on resource-efficiency
alone. This leads to 4 core discourse types: Reformist Circular Society (optimist and holistic),
Technocentric Circular Economy (optimist and segmented), Transformational Circular Society
(sceptical and holistic), and Fortress Circular Economy (sceptical and segmented).
Results from the selected case studies conclude that, although the CE discursive landscape
is quite diverse, current policies focus on technical solutions and business innovations which
do not address the manyfold social and political implications of a circular future. A technocentric CE approach is thus prevalent in the policies of the EU, the Dutch Government, and
the city of Copenhagen. Results also find that the cities of Amsterdam and Glasgow, have
a more holistic approach to CE, by acknowledging many social justice considerations. Yet
the policies of these two cities remain limited in both their redistributive nature and their
transformative potential. Moreover, results demonstrate that all the above case studies follow a growth-optimist approach, seeking to improve economic competitiveness and innovation to decouple economic growth from environmental degradation. However, this
approach has key scientific limitations, as research has shown that absolute eco-economic
decoupling is neither happening nor likely to happen on a relevant scale to prevent climate
change and biodiversity collapse.
241

Summary

This thesis’s research has also found that academics and social movements from the Global
North and South alike have developed a wide range of alternatives to the growth-centric
approach to circularity, such as steady state economics, degrowth, voluntary simplicity, ecological swaraj, economy for the common good, permacircular economy, doughnut economics, buen vivir, and ubuntu. All these alternative discourses can be grouped under the
umbrella concept of a circular society. Circular society discourses are united in their objective to create a democratic, fair and sustainable socio-ecological system, which works in
harmony with the natural cycles of the biosphere to improve human and planetary wellbeing for current and future generations. More pluralism and inclusiveness of these alternative approaches in the debate surrounding circularity could help co-design and implement
sustainable circularity policies, which subordinate economic growth to ecological limits,
planetary boundaries and social imperatives. This is key to ensure the political legitimacy,
social relevance and scientific validity of the circularity policies that are implemented to create a fair, sustainable, and democratic circular society.
Keywords: Circular economy, circular society, policy analysis, discourse analysis, sustainability, environmental governance, pluriverse, degrowth.

242

Samenvatting

Samenvatting
De Circulaire Economie (CE) is recentelijk een populair concept geworden in het duurzaamheidsdebat, zowel in de publieke als de private sector. Voorstanders van dit idee hebben het
vaak over de vele sociale, economische en milieuvoordelen die de toepassing van CE-praktijken te realiseren zijn. Gezien de huidige socio-ecologische uitdagingen om de schaarste
aan hulpbronnen, klimaatverandering en biodiversiteitsverlies te overwinnen en tegelijk
armoede en ongelijkheid in de wereld terug te dringen, zou de CE cruciale oplossingen
en kansen kunnen bieden voor een transitie naar een duurzame, eerlijke en veerkrachtige
toekomst.
De CE kent echter te veel beperkingen om aan deze verwachtingen te voldoen. Het is een
omstreden concept in het debat rond duurzaamheid, waarbij actoren verschillende visies
op een circulaire toekomst hebben, mede op basis van hun specifieke sociaal-economische
belangen. Bovendien zijn de economische, sociale, politieke en milieu-implicaties van verschillende circulaire narratieven en beleidsmaatregelen nog niet genoeg onderzocht en
begrepen.
Dit proefschrift richt zich op deze kloof in bestaand onderzoek door de volgende vraag te
beantwoorden: wat zijn de belangrijkste maatschappelijke narratieven en beleidsmaatregelen over de CE; hoe kunnen deze kritisch geanalyseerd, vergeleken en begrepen worden;
en wat zijn hun duurzaamheidsimplicaties? Om deze vraag te beantwoorden gebruiken
we een interdisciplinaire mixed-method benadering, inclusief kritisch literatuuronderzoek,
inhoudsanalyse, text-mining, en Q-method onderzoek. De casestudies betreffen het CEbeleid van de Europese Unie, het Nederlandse CE-beleid voor kunststoffen en banden, en
de CE-actieplannen van Amsterdam, Kopenhagen en Glasgow.
De resultaten tonen aan dat er in de loop van de tijd een diversiteit van circulariteitsnarratieven is ontstaan. Deze kunnen worden onderverdeeld op basis van twee hoofdcriteria:
ten eerste of ze sceptisch of optimistisch zijn ten opzichte van de mogelijkheid tot ontkoppeling van milieuschade en economische groei, en ten tweede of ze holistisch zijn door
ook aandacht te besteden aan sociale rechtvaardigheid, dan wel een gesegmenteerde focus
hebben enkel op efficiënt gebruik van grondstoffen. Dit leidt tot vier hoofdtypen narratieven: Reformistische Circulaire Samenleving (optimistisch en holistisch), Technocentrische
Circulaire Economie (optimistisch en gesegmenteerd), Transformatieve Circulaire Samenleving (sceptisch en holistisch), en Fort Circulaire Economie (sceptisch en gesegmenteerd).
Resultaten van de geselecteerde casestudies laten zien dat, hoewel het discursieve landschap rond CE behoorlijk divers is, het huidige beleid zich vooral richt op technocratische
oplossingen en bedrijfsinnovaties, die niet ingaan op de vele sociale en politieke implicaties van een circulaire toekomst. In het beleid van de EU, de Nederlandse regering en de
stad Kopenhagen overheerst een technocentrische CE-benadering. De resultaten laten ook
zien dat Amsterdam en Glasgow een meer holistische benadering van CE hebben, doordat

243

Samenvatting

ze vele sociale rechtvaardigheidsoverwegingen meewegen. Toch blijft het beleid van deze
twee steden beperkt, zowel in de herverdeling van welvaart als in hun transformatief potentieel. Bovendien blijkt uit de resultaten van alle casestudies dat men een groei-optimistische
benadering volgt, waarbij wordt gestreefd naar verbetering van het economisch concurrentievermogen en innovatie om economische groei los te koppelen van milieu-impact.
Deze benadering heeft echter belangrijke wetenschappelijke beperkingen, aangezien uit
onderzoek is gebleken dat absolute ontkoppeling van milieu en economie niet plaatsvindt
en waarschijnlijk ook niet zal plaatsvinden op een schaal die voldoende is om klimaatverandering en massaal biodiversiteitsverlies te voorkomen.
Het onderzoek van dit proefschrift heeft ook aangetoond dat dat academici en sociale bewegingen uit zowel het Mondiale Noorden als het Mondiale Zuiden een breed scala aan
alternatieven hebben ontwikkeld voor de op groei gerichte benadering van circulariteit:
zoals in pleidooien voor steady state economics, degrowth, voluntary simplicity, ecological
swaraj, economy for the common good, permacircular economy, doughnut economics,
buen vivir, en ubuntu. Concepten van de circulaire samenleving zijn verenigd in hun doel
om een ​​democratisch, eerlijk en duurzaam sociaal-ecologisch systeem te creëren, dat in
harmonie werkt met de natuurlijke cycli van de biosfeer om het welzijn van mens en planeet
voor huidige en toekomstige generaties te verbeteren. Meer pluralisme en inclusiviteit van
deze alternatieve benaderingen in het debat rond circulariteit zou kunnen helpen bij het
samen ontwerpen en implementeren van duurzaam circulariteitsbeleid, dat economische
groei ondergeschikt maakt aan ecologische grenzen, planetaire grenzen en sociale imperatieven. Dit is essentieel om de politieke legitimiteit, sociale relevantie en wetenschappelijke
validiteit te waarborgen van het circulariteitsbeleid dat wordt uitgevoerd om een eerlijke,
duurzame en democratische circulaire samenleving te creëren.
Trefwoorden: circulaire economie, circulaire samenleving, beleidsanalyse, discoursanalyse, duurzaamheid, milieubeheer, pluriversum, degrowth.

244

Acknowledgements

Acknowledgments
It is impossible to acknowledge and thank everyone that contributed to this thesis, from
the many interviewees and survey respondents to the anonymous reviewers of each paper
and the countless conversations I’ve had with friends, students, and colleagues throughout
these 4 years. I am extremely grateful to my supervisors, Walter and Roberta who believed in
me from the very first online interview and kept supporting and encouraging me to improve
my research throughout these 4 years. Thanks also to Ernst, my secondary supervisor, who
brought invaluable contributions to this research with his comments, suggestions, and edits
to this thesis. I am also grateful to all the CRESTING team, what an inspiring and engaging
group of supervisors and PhD students. The countless meetings, workshops, conferences,
events, and connections we built transformed the somewhat solitary nature of the PhD into
a real convivial experience. I am particularly grateful to Kaustubh and Kieran, my two fellow
ESRs that shared this whole experience with me in Utrecht and became as dear as family
to me. I could not dream of a better way to do a PhD. I am also grateful to all the team at
the Copernicus Institute of Sustainable Development, particularly Peppi, Dirkjan, and Katie,
the Masters students that worked with me in the various chapters of this thesis. It was a real
pleasure to teach and learn from such inspiring young researchers.
I am also deeply grateful to my other colleagues, especially those of the governance group,
of the unmaking project led by Giuseppe Feola and of the Urban Future Studio team led
by Maarten Hajer. Giuseppe’s team brought a breath of fresh air to the office, that inspired
countless ideas and discussions in the “degrowth” section of the institute. They introduced
me to Ontgroei, the Dutch degrowth platform, and together with Olga, Laura, Giuseppe and
Sanli, we co-organized the second online degrowth symposium where some of this thesis
research was presented. Learning and collaborating with Gerrit, Crelis, Julien, Federico,
Wendy, and the many other members of Ontgroei has been immensely valuable to me, as
I found with them an academic, intellectual and activist community that I truly believe in.
In a sustainability field, that I often found elitist, and lacking societal relevance, they were a
light that reminded me that there is another, more critical, radical, and deeply democratic
way to see science and create and share knowledge.
I would also like to thank all the people with whom I collaborated during my PhD, and those
who contributed to this thesis in one way or another, especially Soren, Melanie, Federico,
Oona, Thomas, Paola, Roelf, Jacob, Juil, Denise, Kiyokazu, Yu, Sabrina, Kasper, Piero, Oscal,
Anke, Emmanuel-Benoit, Jeroen, Anya, Ralph, Keith, Anna, Natacha, Tomas, Santi, Anna,
Estephania, Dimitri, Erik, Blake, and Marcus. I have found with them not only countless
insights, as well as inspirations for new publications, initiatives, conferences, and projects
throughout these years, but also new and valuable friendships.
Working and living and doing a PhD in a new country and having to go through a pandemic
takes a lot of care. And I found in Tammy, my wife, friend, lover, and partner, all the care that I

245

Acknowledgements

needed to keep my head high and my heart going. I am immensely grateful to her, she gave
me the courage to apply to this PhD project in the first place and stayed by my side through
the ups and downs of life, keeping me motivated and inspired to continue throughout. My
family has also been a constant source of support and motivation in these times, especially
my mother and father. They shaped and made me, without the example, education and
care they gave me, I wouldn’t be here today. I am also grateful to Coco and D’Artagnan, my
two feline friends, roommates, and companions. I can barely go through a day without their
cuddles and purrs, let alone an entire PhD.
Finally, there is no way to express the gratitude I have for the many new friends I have made
in these 4 years. Kaustubh, Kieran, Thomas, Adam, Damian, Nico, Oksana, Anna, Laisvie,
Kos, and many more have brought countless movements of laughter, joy and care, which
helped me through the ups and downs of life and through the lockdowns imposed by the
Covid-19 pandemic. Living far from family and from home is always a challenge, but thanks
to these new friends, I found a new family and a new home in the Netherlands.
This PhD is nothing more than a fruit of the many encounters, friends, teachers, and
conversations I’ve been lucky to have through the years. I can’t possibly mention everyone
here but I’m immensely grateful to all of you for all the shared memories, thoughts, ideas,
and discussions. Whatever is written here, is just as much a product of your ideas than of
my own.
Finally, if this thesis can be dedicated to anyone, it is to the over 200 human and environmental
rights defenders who give their lives every year and pay the ultimate price while fighting for
a better world for all of us. This thesis is no way near as brave and impactful as their actions,
but it humbly shares their goal for a better tomorrow, and it is gratefully dedicated to their
fight, their courage, and their struggle. May their memory and legacy keep guiding us in our
search for a brighter, fairer, and more sustainable future.

246

About the author/Research context

About the author
Martin Calisto Friant has an interdisciplinary academic background in international
development studies, political ecology, environmental governance, and urban planning
from McGill University (BA), the University of Melbourne (MA), and University College
London (MSc). Before starting his PhD at Utrecht University, he worked as a sustainability
practitioner for various NGOs, inter-governmental organizations, and public institutions and
participated in projects in Africa, Europe, Oceania and North and South America.

Research context
This research was one of 15 individual research projects, all involved in an Horizon2020 ITN
research programme called Cresting. The Cresting project looked at the broad sustainability
implications of the CE. This included five distinct work packages, which examined current
practices and discourses, corporate engagement, public sector engagement, capturing the
benefits of CE and measure the impacts of CE. These projects were spread across 8 European
universities, with partners in Nigeria and China. The PhDs were partnered with two or three
universities, with which they held research visits. During the three years of the project,
meetings and trainings were held in Hull, Utrecht, Lisbon, Troyes, Graz (online) and Pescara
(online). This diversity of project partners, institutors and experiences have allowed the project
and researchers to benefit from a diverse and interdisciplinary array of perspectives.

The Cresting Early Stage Researchers and supervisors Pauline Deutz and Andy Jonas at the first Cresting meeting
in Hull, September 2018.

247

View publication stats

