Sustainable Futures 7 (2024) 100181

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Sustainable Futures
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/sustainable-futures

Urban models: Progress and perspective
Jing Wang a, Gengze Li b, c, *, Huapu Lu b, Zhouhao Wu d
a

Department of Urban and Rural Planning, School of Architecture and Urban Planning, Beijing University of Civil Engineering and Architecture
School of Civil Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
c
National-Local Joint Engineering Research Center of Technologies and Applications for National Geographic State Monitoring, Faculty of Geomatics, Lanzhou Jiaotong
University, Lanzhou, China
d
China State Shipbuilding Corporation System Engineering Research Institute, Beijing, China
b

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Urban modelling
Evolution of urban modelling
Information and communication technologies
Classification

Urban modelling is an important branch of land use science. It integrates geography, surveying and mapping,
information science, system science, economics, sociology and other disciplines to establish urban models, which
have been used to provide support for urban policymaking or analyses. Urban models are used to understand,
analyse, evaluate and reproduce the process of urban development, and predict the consequence of urban
planning scenarios. In this paper, we provide a systematic review of urban models, including the evaluation,
classification, application of urban models, and the timeline of urban models’ development. According to their
modelling styles and applications, urban models can be classified into three categories: aggregate static models of
economic and spatial interaction, urban dynamics models, and behavioural models of individual agents which
linked to spatial location. According to the different modelling methods, urban models can be classified into two
categories: top-down and bottom-up. Nowadays, emerging technologies, especially Information and Communi­
cation Technologies (ICT), are gradually but significantly changing the organization form of urban economic
activities. It enables regions to break the location limitation and join in the national even global industry divi­
sion, and that triggers a new bottom-up rural urbanization process, which formed a significant challenge for
urban models. Based on above discussion, we proposed two perspectives for improvements of urban models,
inculding the integration of ICT with tradtional urban models and integaration of top-down and bottom-up
models.

1. Introduction
Land use science is a discipline that examines the dynamic changes of
land system. The interaction between human and natural environment
forms our land systems [1]. The survival and development of human
society depends on the foundation and services such as food, energy, and
resources provided by the land system [2] and human activities change
land system. The emerging sustainability science is one form of land use
sciences [3] which has seen interdisciplinary research and a great di­
versity in methodological approaches [1,4,5].
Based on land use science, different disciplines have developed a
series of alternative approaches for understanding relationship the
natural environment, human factors and technology according to their
emphases. For example, urban geography focuses on the organization
form and mechanism of natural environment factors and human factors
in urban areas [6] and transportation geography focuses on studying the

role of transport and mobility in the territorial combination of produc­
tivity and the territorial structure of transportation networks [7].
The city is a complex system, it involves social, economic, de­
mographic, transportation, and other aspects [8] and constantly in­
teracts with external systems by population, material, economy and
information exchange [9–11]. Urban area is a highly complex and dy­
namic system of interrelated activities and components with many fac­
tors continually change over time.
To understand the mechanism of urban land use changes and
represent possible future changes within urban systems, urban models
have been developed to describe and analyse the spatial structure of
urban areas and the interaction between various urban features by
equations. An urban model is a functional formula supported by eco­
nomics, geography, sociology, and mathematics. It regards the city as a
complex hierarchy system which contains multiple subsystems, and the
subsystem (e.g., population distribution, transportation and economic)

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: ligengze@msn.com (G. Li).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sftr.2024.100181
Received 20 November 2023; Received in revised form 5 March 2024; Accepted 6 March 2024
Available online 6 March 2024
2666-1888/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync/4.0/).

J. Wang et al.

Sustainable Futures 7 (2024) 100181

set of practical tools for urban analyses which seeks firstly to understand
and describe the mechanism of urban evolution, including govern urban
land use and behaviour of urban system, and secondly to predict the
consequences of future policy decisions and scenario of urban planning
[13,16,23].
Nowadays, with the expansion of city scale and the increase of the
number of large and super-large cities, the traditional urban model,
which focuses on a particular field, is increasingly difficult to deal with
increasingly complex situations. As a result, there is increasing inte­
gration amongst different disciplines, leading to the development of new
models. For example, the integration of land science and transportation
studies has given rise to the land use and transport interaction (LUTI)
model. The integration of LUTI model with economics has formed the
spatial equilibrium model, and so on. As more and more disciplines are
integrated into urban models, the number of parameters and complexity
of the models are rapidly increasing. Moreover, in the era of big data, it
has become increasingly important to process and analyse large amounts
of data. However, the workload of adjusting the models and processing
the data using traditional methods too large, and the efficiency and time
cost become unacceptable.
With the development of computer technology, especially artificial
intelligence (AI), in order to train AI to deal with massive data and
complex tasks, the concept of machine learning has been proposed. It
uses computers to simulate or implement human learning behaviour
[24]. By continualy acquring new knowledge and skills, reorganizing
existing knowledge structures, and thus improving its own performance.
Therefore, machine learning has become an important tool to deal with
complex urban models and massive amounts of data, playing an
extremely significant role in urban studies.
This paper reviews the origin and development of urban models, and
points out that interdisciplinary integration is the trend of urban model
development. The traditional urban models usually approach urban is­
sues form a single prospective, macroscopically (Top-down) or micro­
scopically (Bottom-up). In the future, complex urban multidisciplinary
models based on machine learning with massive parameters may ach­
ieve macro and micro unification and will become one of the most
important directions for urban studies.
In this paper, we briefly introduce the evolution of urban models and
associated theories (Sect. 2) to establish a framework and background of
urban model developments. We focus on the interdisciplinary models (e.
g., land-use and transport interaction models) by providing more details
(Sect. 3). We summarize the general challenges for urban models in Sect.
4. New development or applications of urban models are discussed in
Sect. 5, and some conclusion and suggestions are proved in Sect. 6.

can be quantified by using abstract mathematical formulas. As a
powerful urban research tool, it has the following features: multi-system
collaborative analysis; multi-disciplinary theoretical support; quantita­
tive evaluation [12–15]. For simplicity of understanding and ease of
manipulation it can be divided into subsystems [16], for example,
transport subsystem and land use subsystem. Usually,urban models are
not focused on a certain subsystem, instead, it emphasizes the compre­
hensive influence of urban subsystems on urban spatial structure and
individual behaviour, especially the transportation system and land use
system [17].
Cities will always face various problems in the process of develop­
ment. For example, Fig. 1 shows how the economic performance
changes as the city size grows. It shows that although in the initial stage,
increasing city size has positive effect on agglomeration economies, the
negative effect will appear when it across inflection point [18]. The
negative effect can be caused by many factors, such as traffic congestion,
infrastructure overwhelming, environmental pollution, deterioration of
public health and other urban social environmental and economic is­
sues. For example, high resources consumption with low utilization ef­
ficiency, and environmental pollution weaken the urban economic
performance [19].
To better understand the mechanism of the negative effect and solve
the problem, many studies have examined the relationship between city
size, agglomeration economies, urban evolution and decision making (e.
g. [20–22]). They argue that there is a relationship between city size and
agglomeration economies. However, Capello and Camagni [21] argued
that the question of optimal city size tended to be expressed in a
misleading way. The real issue is not ’optimal city size’ but ’efficient
size’, which depends on the functional characteristics of the city and on
the spatial organisation within the urban system, and has positive effect
on urban development [21]. In other word, optimizing the spatial dis­
tribution and organisation of urban resources will solve urban negative
issues. Therefore, the main task and main challenge of urban modelling
is to better understand the mechanism of the interaction, distribution
and organization of urban factors.
To better understand the mechanism of the distribution of urban
population and solve the problem, urban models have been developed to
study on the relationship between city size, agglomeration economies,
urban evolution and decision making [20–22]. There are theories and
models which study on the mechanism of urban population distribution,
and points out multiple factors which impact on urban residents’ spatial
decision behaviours.
Usually, urban models focus on the relationship between multiple
urban fields in order to understand urban system and predict future
changes. Although urban models are different in various aspects and
details, the purpose of urban modelling is the same. They try to provide a

2. Urban studies and urban models
To a certain extent, the history of human civilization is the history of
urbanization. Thus, many researchers devote themselves to urban
studies. Urban researchers were trying to identify and analyse the urban
development by establishing theories and mathematical models of cities,
which describe various aspects of the urban system by conceptions and
equations. This sector traces the development of urban models in
chronological order and has found that development of urban models is
a process from simple to complex, from a discipline to interdisciplinary
synthesis.
2.1. Urban studies
In 1937, Mumford argued that the city is a related collection of
primary groups and purposive associations: the first, like family and
neighbourhood, are common to all communities, while the second are
especially characteristic of city life. “These varied groups support them­
selves through economic organizations that are likewise of a more or less
corporate, or at least publicly regulated, character; and they are all housed in
permanent structures, whining a relatively limited area. The essential physical

Fig. 1. The relationship between city size and agglomeration economies [18].
2

J. Wang et al.

Sustainable Futures 7 (2024) 100181

means of a city’s existence are fixed site, the durable shelter, and the per­
manent facilities for assembly, interchange, and storage; the essential social
means are the social division of labour, which serves not merely the economic
life but the cultural processes. The city in its complete sense, then, is a
geographic plexus, an economic organization, an institutional process, a
theatre of social action, and an aesthetic symbol of collective unity [25,26].
pp.112).”
In 1950, V. Gordon Childe argues that the essential feature of civi­
lization is a certain size of settlement and population density and “in the
case of the Urban Revolution the increase was mainly account for by the
multiplication of th0e numbers of persons living together” [27]. He
believes the population density is determined by several factors, such as
natural resources, transport, technique and economy [27]. Based on
that, in 1965, Gideon Sjoberg believes urban evolution is intimately
related to three major levels of human organization, each of which is
characterized by its own technological, economic, social and political
patterns [28]. The main manifestation of urban evolution is mainly re­
fers to the urban sprawl and urban form [27–29].
Urban researchers were trying to identify and analyse the force that
push urban development. In 1995, Makse and other researchers argue
that population, economic and other urban resources which they called
development units are the engine of urban development [30]. In 2003,
Yang and others [31] had proposed the concept of geographical poten­
tial which is relative predominance, which includes geographic location,
spatial interregional differences, regional structure and environmental
quality, in geographical location of a region to another region. Such
potential is deeply affected by environmental conditions, converted as
different historical stages, science and technology development. Urban
sprawl is mainly focus on the extent of urbanisation [32], and urban
form is mainly focus on the “metropolitan size, activity intensity, the
degree that activities are evenly distributed, and the extent that
high-density sub-areas are clustered [33].”
Meanwhile, the administrative power also deeply influences on
urban development [31,34]. The administrative power mainly depends
on the administrative level and policies of local governments. However,
how it affects the urban development has not been in-depth researched
yet. In other word, a clear correspondence between policy impact and
urban development has not yet been established. That has limited the
application of urban models in a certain extent.

centre to the countryside. Some researchers use the Hoyt sector model to
explain the outward expansion of cities, for example, [40] use the model
to analyse spatial-temporal land use changes of Ruaka town, Nairobi city
in Kenya, between the years 1988 to 2019. [41] focused on “the sector
features of the replacement and expansion of functional urban land, similar
to Hoyt’s sector mode.”
With the development of urban models, more factors have been
involved into the urban models in order to explore the mechanism of
urban development from multiple perspectives.
System dynamics is a discipline of crossover and integration which
was initially developed by Forrester from MIT [42]. It is a
cross-discipline, which uses information science as enter point, and uses
organisational theory, control theory, tactical decision-making, cyber­
netics, system theory and military games to analyse and explore the
transmission, exchange, organization and control of information and the
casual relationship between decision-making and consequence [43].
System dynamic theory argues that every system has its structure and
the organization of the structure decides the functions of the system.
Thus, it prefers to focus on the interactions and relationships between
the internal subsystems rather than external interference and stochastic
events. The subsystems and elements inside regard as stakeholders of
system dynamics. It uses a standard causal loop approach to describe the
causal relationship and feedback between stakeholders. System dynamic
approaches use qualitative Causal Loop Diagrams and quantitative
stock-flow models to provide a powerful tool to explain and understand
basic structure and the nature of the problem within such systems [43].
It provides an insight for modellers to investigate general dynamic
tendencies [43].
In 1959, Hansen proposed a viewpoint that there is a relationship
between urban land use and accessibility. Because almost all human
activities need to interact through transportation lines, in a certain
context, transportation networks determine the spatial separations of
human activities and land use, such as the distribution of population,
commercial, industrial, etc. [44]. This idea is used as the basis of the
Land use-transportation interaction (LUTI) models and laid their theo­
retical framework. In 1964, Lowry proposed Lowry land use model
which includes a residential location model and a service industry
location model, and the models are nested with each other [45].
The early LUTI model generally adopted spatial interaction theory as
its theoretical basis, but with the intervention of other disciplines, the
LUTI model gradually became more and more complex.
In the initial stages, Lee and Batty argued that the theoretical
drawback of the urban model, based on the theory of spatial interaction,
is that the choices it simulates lack a reliable theoretical basis for
behaviour [46,47]. The accuracy of the spatial interaction model mostly
depends on the correct selection of key parameters. For example, in the
gravity model, attractiveness and distance decay usually are the most
important parameters [48].
Then, the Development of Space Economics and the Model of Space
Equilibrium provide an opportunity for urban models to simulate indi­
vidual behaviours and analyse how they influence urban development
[49,50]. The combination of space-economy and the LUTI model creates
a new type of urban model which is called spatial equilibrium model
[51]. The new model has become the most widely used type of urban
model in the field of simulating the process of socioeconomic evolution,
planning policy evaluation and decision-making support in developed
countries [14,52–54].
LUTI models based on the argument that transportation has a major
impact on the spatial and economic development of cities and regions.
The attractiveness of particular locations depends in part on the relative
accessibility, and this in turn depends on the quality and quantity of the
transportation infrastructure [55]. Certain factors which influence the
growth of urban areas are called urban factors. Almost all urban factors,
which include population, land system, economic activities, public ser­
vice, infrastructure and other urban resources, and urban sub systems
are connected and organized by transportation networks. It should be

2.2. The development of urban models
Model development is a process from simple to complex, from a
single discipline to a multidisciplinary integration.
In the early age, urban models focus on the site of a city, and argue
that the urban development was predominated by the location of a city
centre. For example, in the early 1920s, Ernest W. Burgess proposed his
famous concentric-zone model which argued that land uses tend to
occur in rings around the centre of a growing modern city ([35,36]). In
1929, Burgess outlined an altitudinal-zone model, which argues that
there is a positive relationship between socioeconomic status of resi­
dents and population distribution [35]. In 1939, Hoyt proposed the Hoyt
sector model, which argues that the highest-income residential areas
occur in city centres and expanding outward in wedge-shaped sectors
and lower-income areas successively, distribute flanked on the sectors’
sides [37].
Those three simple models are widely considered as “the classic
models of urban land use” and “to be catalysts of research on cities in both
developed and developing societies [38]. ” They relate city centre location
to urban development, and indicate the relationship between distances,
transportation costs (time and money) and population distribution. They
argue that transportation linkages significantly influence human activ­
ities and their locations [39]. These models have been widely used. For
example, based on concentric-zone model and altitudinal-zone model,
William B. Meyer proved that the role of amenities is the key factor in
residential choice [36], and Dai’s group mentioned that from the city
3

J. Wang et al.

Sustainable Futures 7 (2024) 100181

and workplaces in a zone, it creates more economic activities and pro­
vides more jobs. That increases the “Attraction” of the zone and
encourage people to commute by car. Therefore, the “Attractiveness by
car” has been reinforced. If there are multiple zones in a certain region,
people may compare conditions, such as travel distances, incomes level
and the number of jobs, of those zones and change their destinations of
commute. Thus, higher “Attractiveness of other zones”, lower the attrac­
tion of the zone for people to commute by car. Meanwhile, higher the
“Car ownership”, higher the proportion of people who have the option
that commute by car. It should be noted that with the increase of
employment, more and more people commute by car will caused
negative effects on transport. Such as traffic congestion decreases the
average velocity of cars and people need more time to search for car
parking. So, stakeholders “Attractiveness by car, Commute trips, Parking
search time” and “Time in car commute” formed negative feedback circle
B1, “Attractiveness by car, Commute trips, Speed by car” and “Time in car
commute” formed negative feedback circle B2, and “Attractiveness by car,
Commute trips, Fuel cost” and “Time in car commute” formed negative
feedback circle B3. The time and economic cost of commute by car is
intolerable for some people. Then they may choose to use other
commute modes and that will alleviate negative effects on transport.
Therefore, stakeholders “Attractiveness by car, Commute trips, Speed by
car, Time per commute trip by other modes” and “commute cost other modes”
formed positive feedback circle B4. All those casual chin reactions and
feedbacks will achieve a dynamic equilibrant status.
Fig. 3 shows a simple conceptual structure of traditional general
LUTI model. Land use model include current situation of land use and
land use policy. Transport model includes traffic infrastructure and
travel cost. The accessibility between transport model and land use
model forms the spatial organization of a zone. The interaction between
spatial organization and population and economic activities reforms the
structure of former and impacts on the distribution of the latter, until
they achieve a dynamic equilibrant status.
LUTI model is a commonly used mathematical model that is even
considered to be the only available model for simulating the urban
spatial development process [59]. The main concern of LUTI model is
spatial interaction, which regard the location as the main driving force
for urban land use and transportation development.
Batty categorize the LUTI models into two categories as follows:

noticed that connectivity is the base rock of interactions between urban
factors. Based on that, this paper proposes a hypothesis that the urban
factors are connected and organized by transportation networks and
created urban potential energy which drives the development of urban
areas. The potential energy casts it influences by transportation net­
works. Their energy will be consumed via transportation. In the end, all
the urban factors will form a balanced status and reform the city. Thus,
the consumption of transportation determines which region the urban
factor can affect. Related researchers present the outcome of research on
a sample of 12 European cities and “The outcome of the research points out
that urban transportation infrastructure may have a catalytic effect on the
development, redevelopment and regeneration of urban areas but there are a
lot of other influencing factors which make such re-urbanization processes a
successful or unsuccessful story.” [56]. So, transportation indirectly works
as a catalyst for the development and redevelopment of urban areas as
well as the regeneration of declining areas.
System dynamic approaches allow system and policies to interact
across space and time. Meanwhile, a feature of Land-use/Transport
Interaction Model is that transport and land use systems operate on
different time scales, because the respond from transport users may
relatively quickly to changes in transport policy or cost, but the respond
from land use users may not [43]. Therefore, system dynamics is a ideal
for investigating the interaction between land-use and transport,
because such system “contain feedbacks and delays which are often outside
of the mental model of the decision maker or where feedbacks cross stake­
holder boundaries [43].”
System dynamics model can be used to predict the consequence of a
certain urban planning pattern and they developed related methods to
support decision making. There is a growing body of literatures and
models which explore and analyse the intercation and spatial organ­
iztion of economy, population, migration, infrastructure, land-use and
transportation [43]. They developed urban related methods, such as the
dynamic Land Use and Transport Interaction(LUTI) model MARS
(Metropolitan Activity Relocation Simulator) and they argue that is part
of a structured decision making process [57].
Fig. 2 shows a mental model of commute trips by car in MARS. The
“Employed population, Workplaces, Population, Attractiveness of other zones
and Car ownership” are enter points. The casual chin reactions between
them decided “Attractiveness by car”. For example, with more population

Fig. 2. CLD for the transport model: commute trips by car in MARS [57].
4

J. Wang et al.

Sustainable Futures 7 (2024) 100181

Fig. 3. Traditional general LUTI model(Translated from [58]).

“various theoretical dynamics associated with equilibrium approaches such
as those being developed by Wilson [60]” and Lowry model [45], and
“more physically based land-development models mirrored around cellular
automata and agent-based models” [15,61]. The main difference between
them is that the former is a static model, which assumes that other pa­
rameters will not change over time to predict a certain parameter; while
the latter is a dynamic model, with in which every parameter can be
changed over time. In addition to traditional fields. For example, [62]
argues that by integrating land-use and transport models with envi­
ronmental models of greenhouse gas emissions and climate hazards,
LUTI models show promise as powerful tools to analyse and assess the
impact of urban policy on climate changes. LUTI models are also applied
urban form and energy use [63], and other aspects.
As the interface between human society and the natural environ­
ment, the land system is a typical complex system [64]. With the
development of computer science, the ability of calculation has been
greatly improved, and that provides an opportunity for urban related
researchers to explore the urban development from a micro perspective.
The interaction between multiple urban factors and subsystems
formed a “complex system”. It is characterized by path-dependence,
critical major mutations, spatial self-organization, and spatial emer­
gence [65,66]. In the system, the interaction between those parts (fac­
tors or subsystems), also called “agents” or “cells”, often lead to
large-scale phenomena and that called “emergence” [66,67]. In an
overall sense, the system is hardly “predictable from a knowledge only of
the behaviour of the individual agents” [13,66].
In the field of modelling complex system, pure top-down modelling
methods usually are difficult to attract regional interactions. Whit the
development of computer technology, bottom-up methods provides a
batter choice to describe complex system [68]. For example, Cellular

automata (CA) mode and Agent-based model, which focus on individual
behaviours.
Cellular automata (CA) model is a kind of model that simulates
spatial and temporal discrete complexity by simple local calculation.
This local calculation is based on five elements as follows: Cell, Status,
Neighbourhood, Transfer function and Temporal. The basic algorithm of
the CA model is that in a moment, the status of a cell depends on its
previous status and statuss of its contiguous cells [69]. Such models
usually are described as two-dimensional rectangle grid of cells, where
each cell has a fixed location and attribute information,for example,
land cover, land use or terrain [67], to represent regional land use and
“embodying processes of change in the cellular status are determined in the
local neighbourhood of any and every cell [13]. ”
The earliest CA model can be traced back to the original computer
science and fractal theory [70]. Researchers usually use CA models to
predict or restructure the process of urban growth to compare the con­
sequences of different urban development scenarios. A traditional CA
model uses regular square grid and synchronous growth, and is designed
for representations of land use change in rural-urban fringe settings.
Based on that, related researchers have developed a new CA model that
uses spatial data in the form of irregularly sized and shaped land parcels,
and incorporates synchronous and asynchronous development in order
to model more realistically land use change at the land parcel scale [71].
There are two key components, neighbourhood rules and transition
rules, in CA-based models [72,73]. There is an equation to describe the
dynamic changes in CA models as follows:
(
)
Sijt+1 = f Sijt , Ωtij , T
[74]
The parameter St+1
represents the status of the cell, where spatial
ij
5

J. Wang et al.

Sustainable Futures 7 (2024) 100181

urban growth [77], spatial economy [75] and transportation [13,78].
Under guide of its experience and knowledge, it will consider varying
related factors and make a decision. As a consequence of the decision,
the entity well produces a certain behavioural pattern. Generally, the
agent has four main feature: autorhythmicity, spontaneity, sociality and
reactiveness [79]. Moreover, urban researchers believe that different
modelling problematics can lead to very different solutions. They sug­
gest to use multilevel models, which included macro, intermediate and
micro levels, to build a conceptually or causally linked system of
grouping objects or processes along an analytical scale in order to help
the modeller identify the difficulties peculiar to each of the approaches
[80].
As a model which operates from the bottom up, the main focus of an
Agent-based model is at the micro-level, elemental or individualistic, to
representing behaviours and interactions of those objects through space
and time [13]. The model starts from the definition of the rules of
subjective behaviours to build the framework in order to avoid the un­
derstanding and analyses of the entire system, and makes up for the
difficulty of quantitative description of complex systems by traditional
mathematical and physical models [81,82].
CA and ABMs have something in common, which is that they both
focus on spatial neighbourhood relations and decision making in indi­
vidual level of subject. The location, spatial accessibility and distribu­
tion are very important factors of the land system. Thus, CA and ABMs
usually combine with other spatial interaction models to develop new
models for specific conditions, for example Land use-transportation
interaction models.
The most difference with CA models is that CA models focus on
transition rules, but ABMs focus on the emergence which are created by
the interaction between different microscopic individuals in the macrodimension [83,84]. However, both CA and ABMs have their limitation,
for example, CA models “temporally persistent transition probability and
neighbourhood effect cannot express the spatiotemporal land use dynamics to
generate accurate simulations [85] ”, because in the real world, the rule of
land use is usually change over time, but the rule of CA model hardly can
change temporally. And ABMs still lack effective solution in the

coordinates are (i, j) at time t+1, which is correlated to the current status
of cell (i, j) at time t. The parameter Ωtij represents the influence on its

neighbourhood. The parameter T represents the transition rules. All
those parameters are in a particular linkage of f [74].
After a period of development, the CA model has developed a series
of branch models. In 2016, Li and Gong created an evolution tree to
illustrate the development and inheritance of CA models. Although it
does not contain all CA models, the most typical models are in the tree
(Fig. 4) [74].
Based on the development of the modelling framework or main
components of CA-based models, Li and Gong proposed a categorization
scheme which divide CA models into two main branches: probabilitybased models and rule-based models.
The manifestation of probability-based CA models is that the changes
of the status of cells are mainly determined by a conjunction of different
components as a synthesized probability, and the manifestation of rulebased CA models is that the transition has been determined by five pa­
rameters (“i.e., diffusion, breed, spread, slope resistance and road
gravity”) and “correspond to four types of urban growth patterns, i.e.,
spontaneous, diffusion, organic and road-influenced [74] ”. CA models
can be regarded “as simplifications of agent-based models where the focus is
on emergent spatial patterns through time [13]”.
The creation of Agent-based modelling (ABMs) can be traced back to
the cellular automaton model. It is an intelligent entity, which in­
corporates other ideas, including but not limited to game theory, com­
plex systems, emergence, computational sociology, multi-agent systems
and evolutionary computation. Because this model requires a lot of
calculations, it didn’t usher in its prosperous period until computer
technology progressed. In 2009, Farmer and Foley defined ABMs as: a
computer simulation of a large number of decision-making subjects and
institutions interacting through set rules [75]. Subjects in ABMs not only
have neighbour interactions, but also have the ability to learn and
evolve [68].
Agent-based modelling is one of the most common approach to
“analyse and simulate Land-use/cover change (LUCC) as the result of indi­
vidual decisions [76]”. The model has been used to test urban policies in

Fig. 4. An evolution tree of CA-based urban growth models [74].
6

J. Wang et al.

Sustainable Futures 7 (2024) 100181

publication Urban Dynamics [94] introduced an insight “forming a bridge
between engineering and the social sciences [95]”. These models use system
dynamics methodology to analyses urban socioeconomic processes [23,
95]. BY system dynamics methodology, socioeconomic processes are
divided in elements and there are causal relationships between those
elements. The change of elements cast their influence via certain causal
relationships and triggers chain reactions. System dynamics methodol­
ogy is usually used to deal with nonlinear growth issues.
The last class is the focus of current urban research which involves
models built around representing the action and behaviour of individual
agents which linked to spatial location, for example cellular automata
and agent-based models. Those models are bottom-up models, which
focus on micro-level interactions, for example, the neighbourhood in­
teractions between cells agents through spatial location analysing [23,
96,97]. However, the action and behaviour of individual agents are
different to quantify and sometimes justify.
Foot provided another classification, which according to their
theoretical basis, they can be categorize to the three main types as fol­
lows: based on gravity, linear and optimizing mathematics models [16].
The gravity based model, for example, space economic and space
equilibrium models, provide an opportunity for urban models to simu­
late individual behaviors which attractiveness and distance decay usu­
ally are the most important parameters [48]. The attractiveness of a
factor decays with distance. Therefore, the onset strength of attractive­
ness and rate of decay dominate the influence area of a factor.
The linear based model usually has been used to deal with the so­
cioeconomic and land use activities in a certain urban area by deriving a
set of linear equations [16]. This model regards socioeconomic and land
use activities as the independent variables. The information of a variable
has collected for each zone in the region to calculate the dependant
variable, such as population and employment, in the region.
The optimizing models try to provide an optimal solution for urban
development by performing a similar function. For example, simple
optimal urban size theories, which based on the main stream economics
and focus on the cost-benefit analyses, provide the same optimal size for
cities when they have the same production function [98].

application of large-scale areas [5,86], because “finding sufficient
empirical data about decision making processes and outcomes at larger scales
is extremely difficult [5] ”.
Agent-base models and cellular automata models are considered to
be ideal methods for studying complex systems and simulating land
changes [68,81,82].
With the continuous improvement of new technology and infra­
structure, especially information network technology and infrastruc­
ture, the era of big data in urban planning research has quietly arrived.
Using the massive amounts of data constantly generated in cities, such as
bus card data, traffic monitoring data, mobile phone positioning data,
and social network data, urban researchers can more directly mine in­
dividual behaviour characteristics from real data [87,88]. Furthermore,
new computer technology, such as artificial intelligence and deep
learning, has been applied in urban research [89,90]. It brings new
opportunities and challenges to the development of urban models.
By combining system dynamics with other disciplines, system dy­
namics approach plays a significant role in understanding and analysis
the impact of a certain decision on socioeconomic, policy, population
and other human activities, and the consequence that created. For
example, by combining system dynamic with geographical information
system to consider land use types and transport supplies, [91] used LUTI
model to develop an agent-based approach to calculate the impact of
Light Rail Transit on touristic suitability in Asia New Bay Area, Kaoh­
siung, Taiwan, China.
2.3. Classification of urban models
Urban models can be classified according to different criteria. Fig. 5
shows two different methods for the classification of urban models. The
first method categorized models by modelling styles and application,
and the second method categorized models by modelling methods.
2.3.1. Classification by modelling styles and applications
Batty defined three main classes [92] of urban models by their
modelling styles and applications as follows (Fig. 5).
The first class is built around the aggregate static models of economic
and spatial interaction. The theoretical roots of this class mainly are
socioeconomics, regional economics and urban economics, and location
theory, for example, land use and Transportation Interaction (LUTI)
models. These models represent the spatial equivalents of classical
macroeconomics and microeconomics theory. They are mainly used to
understand and predict how urban land use and transportation policies
effect on the spatial distribution of urban socioeconomics and trans­
portation activities [93]. In short, this class of models is the most
operational [23].
The second class is urban dynamics models. In 1969, JW. Forrester’s

2.3.2. Classification by modelling methods
According to different modelling methods, urban models can be
classified into two categories: top-down and bottom-up (Fig. 5).
The top-down models are based on spatial interaction models,
including gravity model, entropy maximization and etc., which argue
that individual behaviours are influenced by the context of macro trends
and those individuals are regarded as several groups and the behaviour
of each group will show homogeneity on a certain level [99–101]. By
setting global behavioural assumptions, the model avoids calibration
and calculation difficulties, and reduces the requirement of individual

Fig. 5. Classification of urban modelling.
7

J. Wang et al.

Sustainable Futures 7 (2024) 100181

behavioural data. It is helpful for related researchers to reveal the
inherent mechanism of selection behaviour from a macro perspective.
With the development of microeconomics and stochastic utility
theory [102], bottom-up methods have become an important research
direction, and it provides a better choice to describe complex system
[68]. The model, which operate from the bottom up, mainly focus on the
micro-level, elemental or individualistic, to representing behaviours and
interactions of those objects through space and time [13]. The model
starts from the definition of the rules of subjective behaviours to build
the framework in order to avoid the understanding and analyses of the
entire system, and makes up for the difficulty of quantitative description
of complex system by traditional mathematical and physical models [81,
82].
In most cases, a land use model is a dynamic general equilibrium
model [103]. It emphasizes the autonomy and dynamics of individual
behaviour, and believes that individual behaviours depend on their so­
cial, economic, political and other conditions [104]. In addition, those
behaviours will interact with each other and the context to produce
urban form as consequence subconsciously or unconsciously, and
related researchers named this process “self-organization” [105–107].

equilibrium point [111,112]. For example, general LUTI models are
trying to find the equilibrium status of the interaction between land use,
transportation, population and economic activities. However, urban
system is an opening system and continually exchange resources with
outsides. Cities need to output products, services, and consume with the
input of resources, energy, and human efforts to maintain their func­
tions. [62] approached the challenges from socioeconomic aspect. They
argue that LUTI models need to adopt and integrate external factors and
new approaches to socioeconomic simulation of land use and trans­
portation system. Because with the development of technology, new
socioeconomic activities, such as online retail, have created new so­
cioeconomic organization forms. That require new approaches to so­
cioeconomic simulation.
Based on the comprehensive philosophical method of analysing ur­
banization, [113] poses five driving forces of urbanization, “which are
industrialization, modernization, globalization, marketization and admin­
istrative/institutional power”. Except the administrative/institutional
power, other factors are related to socioeconomic. Socioeconomic is
very important for urban development. For example, [34] argue that
urban sprawl was significantly associated with urban population den­
sity, gross domestic product(GDP) per capita, and industrial structure.
Further, when the spatial heterogeneity was considered, the driving
forces of urban sprawl exhibited different magnitudes and directions
[34]. The results indicate that to formulate effective urban planning and
land use policies, decision-makers should seriously consider the differ­
ences in urban sprawl depending on region, urban size, and hierarchy
[34]. In other word, it is hard to provide a uniform land use policy for
every region.
Although they differ in their research focus, Crooks, Castle and Batty
analyse the problem in terms of how to build an urban model [110],
Xuecao Li and Peng Gong emphasized the role of socioeconomic activ­
ities in urban development [74,111,112], they all agree with that those
existing urban models have certain of deficiencies in reflecting the
complexity of the real world and insufficient to deal with complex urban
systems that change over time.
System dynamic models use system dynamics methodology to ana­
lyses urban socioeconomic processes [23,95] and can more realistically
reflect the socioeconomic activities. However, these complicated re­
lationships between participants of socioeconomic activities are difficult
to express based on structural models and collect detailed socioeco­
nomic data. Because in many cases, the socioeconomic dataset tends to
be generalized.
In summary, the main challenge of urban modelling has always been
around the unprecedented increasingly complex urban system [114].

3. General challenges of urban modelling
There are two very important concepts, “factors” and “drivers”,
which will provide a better view to understand the process of land use
change. Urban factors, such as population, economic and other urban
resources also called development units, which are the engine of urban
development [30]. The organization and interaction of factors create
drivers, which are certain socioeconomic activities which provide
driving forces for land use changes [108]. For example, in many cities,
industrial economic activities cause the conversion of agricultural land
use into industrial land use in last two centuries.
The aim of urban modelling is trying to simulate and analyse the
process of how factors formed the drivers and predict the consequence.
Usually, based on the mechanism of modelling, urban models are
divided in to data-driven and process-driven approaches [74]. The
former is based on historical data to build a relationship between urban
development and urban factors. Usually, the historical data is easy to
observe and data-driven approaches can capture the main trajectory of
urban development by statistical relationships [74]. Thus, the prediction
is made with hard empirical experience. However, They “focus on their
correlations instead of their causal relationships [74]” which only provides
weak evidence for urban development mechanism. The latter “is based
on a clear mechanism and is generalized in a conceptual model [74]”. [74]
proposed a viewpoint that, theoretically, process-driven approaches can
more realistically reflect the socioeconomic activities. However, the
process of urban development is influenced by complexed nonlinear and
hierarchic interactions between various factors. Any change of any
single one of the urban factors will affect other urban factors. Therefore,
these complicated relationships are difficult to express based on struc­
tural models. Furthermore, “available datasets in support of the construc­
tion of structural models are limited both in time and in space, particularly for
detailed socioeconomic datasets [74].” Because in many cases, the dataset
tends to be generalized. Urban systems are very complex. Interactions
between urban factors usually are complex and nonlinear. Therefore, in
most cases, these two approaches coexist in urban models [109].
In cities, some problems that did not exist before have emerged over
time. Thus, urban modelling faces challenges over time. Crooks, Castle
and Batty provided a list of the seven main challenges of urban model­
ling as follows: “the purpose for which the model is built, the extent to which
the model is rooted in independent theory, the extent to which the model can
be replicated, the ways the model might be verified, calibrated and validated,
the way model dynamics are represented in terms of agent interactions, the
extent to which the model is operational, and the way the model can be
communicated and shared with others [110]”. Existing urban mobility
models have four main limitations as follows: mainly focus on find an

4. The impact of emerging technologies on urban development
4.1. Geographic information system (GIS) and urban research
Because the huge amount of data that needs to be considered, it had
been extremely difficult to predict urban development in the past.
Fortunately, with the advance of computer science, computer-assisted
technology has been widely used into the study in the field of geogra­
phy. In 1968, the term "geographic information system" was been used by
Roger Tomlinson in his paper " A Geographical Information System for
Regional Planning [115] ". That is the symbol of the emergence of a new
interdisciplinary subject, Geographic Information System (GIS). With
the popularity of big data, which involves unprecedented volumes of
data, GIS in the era of big data has a more powerful tool for data-driven
spatial prediction [116]. Related researchers are trying to draw
conclusion about the behaviour of complex systems in realistic envi­
ronments in order to understand and predict the future of specific areas
by GIS software. They design a series of GIS model to study urban
objects.
There are four mainly different modelling techniques as follows:
Cellular automata (CA) mode, which is a kind of model that
8

J. Wang et al.

Sustainable Futures 7 (2024) 100181

simulates spatial and temporal discrete complexity by simple local
calculation. This local calculation base on five elements as following:
Cell, Status, Neighbourhood, Transfer function and Temporal. The basic
algorithm of CA model is that in a moment, the status of a cell depends
on its previous status and statuss of its contiguous cells [69]. Traditional
CA model uses regular square grid and synchronous growth, and is
designed for representations of land use change in rural-urban fringe
settings. Related researchers develop a new CA model that use spatial
data in the form of irregularly sized and shaped land parcels, and in­
corporates synchronous and asynchronous development in order to
model more realistically land use change at the land parcel scale [71].
CA model usually has been used to predict or restructure the process of
urban growth to compare the consequences of different urban devel­
opment scenarios. This model divided factors into square grid in order to
analyse their interactions by spatial neighbourhood relation. However,
some urban factors in different cells will organize a tight correlated
aggregation under certain conditions, which leads those cells are more
influential than others. In addition, under certain circumstances, some
cells can influence others without spatial neighbourhood relation.
Because of that, a more flexible model is needed.
Agent based model is an intelligent entity, which incorporates other
ideas, including but not limited to game theory, complex system,
emergence, computational sociology, multi-agent systems and evolu­
tionary computation. Under guide of its experience and knowledge, it
will consider varying related factors and make a decision. As a conse­
quence of the decision, the entity well produces a certain behavioural
pattern. Generally, the agent has four main feature: autorhythmicity,
spontaneity, sociality and reactiveness [79]. Moreover, different
modelling problematics can lead to very different solutions. For
example, multilevel models, which included macro, intermediate and
micro levels, are used to build a conceptually or causally linked system
of grouping objects or processes along an analytical scale in order to help
the modeller identify the difficulties peculiar to each of the approaches
[80]. Although the relationship between various urban factors are well
analysed by those models, usually the same type of urban factors will
form a subsystem, such as urban traffic networks, retail networks,
electricity networks and the like. Not only the interaction of individual
urban factors, but also those subsystems will effect on the distribution of
urban forms. It is necessary to consider the relationships between urban
subsystems.
System dynamics is a discipline of crossover and integration which
takes very important meaning in urban research. It argues that every
system has its structure and the organization of the structure decides the
functions of the system. Thus, it prefers to focus on the interactions and
relationships between the internal subsystems rather than external
interference and stochastic events. Urban researchers argue that system
dynamics model can be used to predict the consequence of a certain
urban planning pattern and they developed related methods to support
decision making. They developed urban related methods, such as the
dynamic Land Use and Transportation Interaction model MARS
(Metropolitan Activity Relocation Simulator) and they argue that is part
of a structured decision making process [57]. Land-use/Transportation
Interaction Model, LUTI is a commonly used mathematical model that
is even considered to be the only available model for simulating the
urban spatial development process [59]. The main concern of LUTI
model is spatial interaction, which regard the location as the main
driving force for urban land use and transportation development.
However, there are many other important factors which are involved in
urban evolution, such as policy, culture, public service, regional struc­
ture and etc. Thus, the model needs to be further developed. All those
models believe a certain urban pattern will produce the certain urban
form as consequence. However, in the process of urban growth, there are
a lot of serendipitous and uncertain events. Moreover, all the resources
in the urban area are circulating. Therefore, a drawback of such models
is they ignore those uncertainty and resource circulation in a city.
Urban metabolism model is a specific type of the Grey Model. The

concept was proposed in 1965 by Wolman, and it is fundamental to
developing sustainable cities [117]. Kennedy argued that Urban meta­
bolism can be defined as “the sum total of the technical and socioeconomic
processes that occur in cities, resulting in growth, production of energy, and
elimination of waste” [118]. Urban metabolism is an organic process in
cities which output products, services, and waste with the input of re­
sources, energy, and human efforts. The Grey model is a kind of fuzzy
prediction model which flexibly predicts the development tendency of
an object in a long-term [119]. The core of the model is to measure
input-output ratio and use that to predict the future of a region and find
out the confliction between a city’s production volume and the needs if
the city. So, the urban evolution is an extremely complicated dynamic
process. Many factors are involved in urban evolution and the under­
lying relationship dependencies between them need to be discovered,
which is vital to know the whole patterns of the urban issues.
Urban development is an extremely complicated issue. It gets many
restrictions of factors, such as economy, population, environment, pol­
icy, culture, transportation and etc. Furthermore, the interactions be­
tween those factors are extremely complicated and they produce the
urban form as consequence. It is a spontaneous process, where a certain
order and form are arising from interactions between subsystem factors
of the system without external interference in a certain context [120].
Because of constantly changing external conditions, urban factors,
which are the components of urban form, are uncertain. They can be
increased, decreased, created and destroyed, which will result in con­
stant urban evolution [121].
GIS has provided a powerful tool to analyses and simulate the process
of urban development. Based on powerful computing power, constantly
changing external conditions and urban factors can be calculated to
predict the outcomes of a certain scenario, for example, overlay analysis
and buffer zone calculation. Therefore, GIS has been used at multiple
fields, such as urban planning, trasnprotation, decision-making support
and urban govern. For example, using accessibility analysis of trans­
portation as the starting point, Li et al. employed GIS spatial analysis
tools to analyse the impact of urban faciciliteis’ distribution, residents’
needs, and income on travel behaviour in China, taking into account the
country’s local contexts. They provided the concept of transport
impedance indicator to describe the strength of this impact [122]. Zhou
et al. used GIS tools to analyse irregular land use patterns at the urban
fringe, providing decision support for urban planners and policymakers
[123]. Based on that, smart city that comprehensively assist in urban
management,planning and policy making have experienced tremendous
development.
Smart city is widely regarded as an effective option to solve urban
diseases, for example traffic congestion, infrastructure overwhelming,
air pollution [124–127]. It is an emerging strategy aiming to provide
better life conditions to support the specific needs of each city for citi­
zens by leveraging technologies to allocate urban resources more wisely
[124–126].
The Chinese government introduced a series of policies in order to
the promotion of smart city. However, performances of cities where
locate in eastern and southern coastal areas have met national govern­
ment goals more than others, and there are significant differences be­
tween them [127]. Liyin Shen and other Chinese researcher [127]
believe that the political execution performance of local governments in
the practice of policies affects smart city application. However, there “is
little study examining what results have been achieved in practice by applying
policy measures [127]”. The participation of departments coordination
mechanism and the department barriers of data sharing are still the
biggest bottleneck of smart city development [128]. In other word, the
divisions between different government layers hampered the develop­
ment of smart city.

9

J. Wang et al.

Sustainable Futures 7 (2024) 100181

4.2. The impact of ICT based economic organization form on urban
development

highly consistent with transportation networks. However, e-commercial
activities reformed the socioeconomic networks. For example, infor­
mation can be disseminated via the Internet instead of traditional
transportation network based ways.
With the ITC boosting, ITC based activities enable regions to break
the location limitation, which triggers a new bottom-up internet process.
It has greatly increased the demand for remote work that enforced and
accelerated the impact of ICT on transportation. ICT has reorganized the
way of economic activities that distribution of economy participants
depends on the spatial relationship and social network relationship and
ICT infrastructure. Certain economic activities, such as information ex­
change no longer be limited by spatial distance under the ICT support. It
dramatically decreases related transportation needs. It affects the dis­
tribution, circulation and exchange of population, and further reforms
urban planning, economic organization, and policymaking.
Based on ITC, E-commercial activities enable regions to break the
location limitation and join in the national even global industry division,
and that trigger a new bottom-up rural urbanization process in China
[134]. Related researchers [134] argue that although E-commerce in­
creases the capital and talents back to the rural areas and contributes to
rural urbanization, it is still cannot to change the overall trend of pop­
ulation reduction in the entire rural areas in the process of urbanization
in China. [134] suggested that local government should establish a
governance system that comprehensively considers the demand of
market and residences in order to guide the restructuring of rural space.
For example, positively increasing the welfare of rural population and
coordinating multiple villages or towns joining to the industry chain.
In China, a huge number of villages, rural settlements and villagers
who are in the agricultural Hukou group, choice to develop E-commerce
by Taobao, a Chinese online trade market like Amazon or eBay. Based on
the market requirement and infrastructure conditions, especially ICT
related infrastructure, online commerce tradesmen select site to form
“Taobao villages [135]” by integrating and organizing capital flows,
human power, goods flow, technical flow, etc., and that will influence on
the surrounding areas of Taobao villages [136]. Wan and other re­
searchers [136] argue that E-commerce villages influence people’s
spatial decision behaviours which impact on traditional land use change
pattern, and they provide a concept “flow factors [136]”, a characteristic

With the development of the science and technology, communica­
tion and computer innovative technologies had been applicated in urban
development, and that pose new challenges for urban planning. Those
unprecedented technologies are changing the lifestyle of us [129],
especially, information and communication technologies (ICT). Based
on the use of ICT to integrate urban resources, it presents a new city
pattern that urban resources can be allocated across multiple de­
partments [127] which can provide urban planning and management
decision-making supporting for decision makers to “modify urban in­
frastructures, public and private services and governance activities [130]”.
Digital economy [131] also based on ICT and it has gradually
changed the city. Although a growing body of literatures has studied
digital economy development, there is a little of theoretical and
empirical research to understand the impact of digital economy and
migration, which is the one of the key driving forces for urban devel­
opment, on urbanism. In 2019, Yanliu Lin firstly posed a concept
framework of “E-urbanism” to divided real world into three interwoven
layers by attributes as ICT based economic activitie organisations, so­
cioeconomic relationships, and phsical world, “namely of ICT infra­
structure and production networks, social networks and power relations, and
urban form and land use”(Fig. 6), and she believes that the impact of
e-commerce and migration on urbanism is fundamentally revolution­
izing social and spatial reorganization of the city [132]. Because digital
economy is not totally depending on spatial neighbourhood relationship
as those traditional economic activities. For example, the internet is
changing our world and the way we living in a city [133], because some
socioeconomic and other activities which depend on the internet, they
have been called Digital economy [131], have dramatically influence on
population distribution.
In the traditional offline economic activities, interactions between
participants mainly depends on transportation networks. Exchanges and
flows of human power, capital, information etc. need to be done by
physical measures. For example, information needs to be passed through
the transportation networks in the form of physical letters or messen­
gers. Therefore, the social networks and relations of urban factors are

Fig. 6. Three interwoven layers [132].
10

J. Wang et al.

Sustainable Futures 7 (2024) 100181

indicator to describe population flows, cash flows, goods flows, tech­
nical flows and etc. They believe the flow factors can be used in digi­
talized governance system to guide planning and management for rural
areas, and fulfil “the gap in terms of the interaction between E-commerce
village and space of flows [136]”. The mechanism of Taobao villages’
development shows that ICT based E-commerce activities have reformed
population flows in China [132,134,136].
Although ITC decreases the limitation of spatial conditions and is
also the key driving force for contemporary urban development [132],
most Taobao villages are located in the developed regions of China.
[132] believes that the interaction relationship between urban factors is
significant as well as spatial distribution. Thus [132] posed a network to
describe socioeconomic relations between urban factors, and by
comprehensive considering infrastructure, urban form, land use, and
transportation network, she proposed a conceptual framework of E-ur­
banism (Fig. 6) to understand the impact of E-commerce and migration
on urbanism. Lin argued that E-commerce activities bring an unprece­
dent phenomenon that people, who live in different areas, can be
involved in the same economic activity at the same time by ICT infra­
structure. Therefore, ICT has reformed the relationship between eco­
nomic activities and population distribution. [132] used the framework
to study Taobao villages in Guangzhou city and concluded that E-com­
merce had changed the city’s urban structure, which is the arrangement
of land use and the spatial organization of urban factors in a certain
urban area, by providing remote coordination and organization of social
and economic activities.
Based on ITC, e-commercial activities enable regions to break the
location limitation and join in the national even global industry division
and increase the capital and talents back to the rural areas and con­
tributes to rural urbanization, and that trigger a new bottom-up rural
urbanization process in China [134]. E-commerce villages, such as
Taobao villages influence people’s spatial decision behaviours which
impact on traditional land use change pattern [136].
To understand the impact of e-commerce and migration on urban­
ism, Lin [132] posed a concept framework of E-urbanism to describe
socioeconomic relations between urban factors, and by comprehensive
considering infrastructure, urban form, land use and transportation
network. Lin argued that e-commerce activities bring an unprecedented
phenomenon that people, who live in different areas, can be involved in
the same economic activity at the same time by ICT infrastructure.
Therefore, ICT has reformed the relationship between economic activ­
ities and population distribution. For example, Taobao villages in
Guangzhou city provided a conclusion that e-commerce has changed
urban structure of the city by providing remote coordination and or­
ganization of social and economic activities [132]. Fig. 6 shows Lin’s
E-urbanism framework.
Spatial organization form of urban factors is reform by ICT based
economic activities, and revolutionized social and spatial reorganization
of economic activities. Classical urban models are facing unprecedented
challenges that social and economic activities not only depend on spatial
neighbourhood and distance, but also depend on ICT based socioeco­
nomic relation networks of urban factors.
In 21st century, urban phenomenon is emerging that the networked
polycentric mega-city region. Developed around one or more cities of
global status, it is characterized by a cluster of cities and towns, physi­
cally separate but intensively networked in a complex spatial division of
labour. They describes and analyses eight such regions in North West
Europe [137]. In many cases, the relationships between urban factors
are nonlinear and hierarchic and their interactions produce the urban
form as consequence. In other word, city should be regarded as an in­
tegral organization.
To solve the problem of population overloading in urban areas and
alleviate the development gap between urban and rural areas, Chinese
government has implemented a series of measures, including the
development of e-commerce in rural areas. For example, many villagers
in China are engaged in the sales industry on Taobao, the biggest online

sales platform in China. According to the statistical data of Taobao, in
China, there are 7023 Taobao villages, that is, more than 10 % of the
villagers do Taobao business in the village. Taobao villages have not
only created more jobs in rural areas, absorbed part of the urban surplus
population, but also narrowed the urban-rural development gap.
Meanwhile, the mechanism of Taobao villages’ development shows that
E-commerce activities have reformed population flows in China [132,
134,136].
The concept of E-commerce, ICT based socioeconomic organization,
is consisted of land use, population and economic activities sub-models.
The basic idea of the concept comes from Lin’s E-urbanism framework
(Fig. 6). In addition to considering traditional spatial organization,
which formed by land use, transportation, population and economic
activities sub-models, ICT based organization also influences the equil­
ibrant status of the traditional general LUTI model.
E-commerce continually changing social and economic human ac­
tivities organization form and population distribution in last decades.
Online information and capital flows of E-commerce replace certain
traditional human travel needs. The fact that E-commerce work is not
limited by geographical location makes it possible to provide job op­
portunities in places where the cost of living is lower, for example rural
areas. It increases the capital and talents back to the rural areas and
contributes to rural urbanization. Fig. 7 shows that like traditional
spatial organization, E-commerce organization has impact on land
attraction.
The classical general LUTI model assumes that people are free to
relocate and the interaction between economic participants via trans­
portation networks. However, the situation is changed. Therefore, Ecommerce need to be considered in LUTI model practice.
On one hand, Smart city is widely regarded as an effective option to
solve urban diseases [124–127]. It is an emerging strategy aiming to
provide better life conditions to support the specific needs of each city
for citizens by leveraging technologies to allocate urban resources more
wisely [124–126].
On the other hand, the Internet, a ICT based communication
network, is changing our world and the way we living in a city [133],
because some socioeconomic and other activities which depend on the
internet, they have been called Digital economy [131] or E-commercial
activities, have dramatically influence on population distribution and
gradually changed the city.
With the development of interdisciplinary research, urban land use
models have been combined with other related models to develop new
models. For example, the LUTI model was developed by combining
transportation and urban land use models.
Studies on the mechanism of urban development gradually realized
the influence of science, technology, economy, culture, site, policy and
social structure on urban sprawl [138]. Although urban models differ in
various aspects and details, the purpose of urban modelling is the same.
They try to provide practical tools for urban analyses that seek firstly to
understand and describe the mechanism of urban evolution, including
governing urban structures and behaviour of the urban system. Sec­
ondly, they aim to predict the consequences of future policy decisions
and scenarios of urban planning [13,16,23].
ICT-based economic activities are gradually deeply influencing the
organization form of urban factors and people’s travel behaviours. For
example, some participants in economic activity are freed from geo­
spatial constraints by ICT-based remote working. This significantly in­
fluences personal transportation needs and behaviours as well as land
attraction and population distribution.
Therefore, urban modelling is facing more and more challenges. To
accommodate an urbanizing world population, to provide insights
which can help policy makers to solve that problem, a theoretical model
that accurately analyses and predicts “urban evolution [28]” is needed.
Moreover, in the past two years, after the COVID-19 outbreak, gov­
ernments worldwide have adopted a series of containment measures for
a while to decrease the growth rate of COVID-19. Those strict control
11

J. Wang et al.

Sustainable Futures 7 (2024) 100181

Fig. 7. The impact of E-commerce on land attraction.

measures suspend or reduce public transportation services and limit
travel opportunities of the resident to leave home, and the influence of
COVID-19 on human travel behaviors becomes a hot point. People are
aware that the strict travel control measures effectively mitigated the
spread of COVID-19 and significantly decreased transportation activ­
ities, especially decreasing public passenger demand ridership. For
example, in China and European countries, people are inclined to use
“zero contact” transportation, such as bicycles, walking, and driving
private vehicles to avoid public transportation. Even in Stockholm,
Swedish, their local authorities did not implement strict lockdown
measures, local public ridership has been decreased 60%. Meanwhile,
the World bank’s data indicate a significant decrease in the economic
growth rate of those main economic entities around the world after the
COVID-19 outbreak.
To reduce the negative effect of travel restrictions on the economy,
China, the UK, the USA, Germany, and other countries have encouraged
people to work at home. That greatly decreases the commute needs of
people and increases remote-based economic activities. The Internet, an
ICT based communication network, is changing our world and daily
lives. They can be communicated and connected without transportation.
The only they need is the Internet. Thus, ICT dramatically influenced
population distribution and gradually changed the city during the
COVID-19 period. It requires analysing the public transportation be­
haviors at different scales, especially to reveal their underlying mecha­
nism. Therefore, a profound impact and mechanism research of public
transportation behaviors under the COVID-19 epidemic warrants further
study.

4.3. Machine learning in urban studies and urban models
Nowadays, machine learning plays an important role in urban
planning and land use and has been integral to urban stuidies for mutiple
aspects [139], for example, urban growth simulation [140], traffic
forecasting [141]. Combined with remote sensing, machine learning has
been apllied in the field of land-use and land cover-change (LULCC)
[142]. Modelling of LULCC effectively expanded the toolbox of territo­
rial and urban planning.Meachine learning has greatly improved the
efficiency of urban models. Data is the foundation for urban models.
Timely and accurate data is crucial for urban planning and
decision-making. Machine learning has significantly improved the effi­
ciency of data production. For example, Satellite remote sensing pro­
vides the advantage of quickly and frequently acquiring data in vast
urban landscapes. [143] used machine learning models to process urban
remote sensing data, and the results showed that compared to tradi­
tional data collection methods, the new approach achieved significant
efficiency improvements.
Meanwhile, machine learning excels at handling complex models. In
the study of urban growth prediction, making accurate predictions is
particularly challenging due to the existence of complex topological
structures and the high-dimensional nature of datasets related to urban
growth [144]. Traditional models often perform poorly when predicting
urban growth. [144] conducted a study on urban growth in Florida using
machine learning models, and the results showed that machine learning
has higher accuracy compared to traditional methods (e.g., Logistic
regression).
12

J. Wang et al.

Sustainable Futures 7 (2024) 100181

Machine learning has the ability to analyse massive amounts of
urban-related data such as geographical data and urban population data,
and to classify, manage, summarize, and analyse various data from
different sources. This can help urban planners better understand and
meet the living needs of different groups, especially those vulnerable
groups that are often easily ignored and concealed behind statistical
averages.
Deep neural network models are one of the most important compo­
nents of machine learning. Their basic structure includes an input layer,
a hidden layer, and an output layer. The input layer is responsible for
receiving input data, the hidden layer performs nonlinear trans­
formations on the data and feature extraction, and the output layer
makes predictions or decisions based on the extracted features [145].
With the improvement of computer performance, the computing power
of deep neural network models is becoming stronger, and the scale of
data processed and the complexity of tasks are rapidly increasing. After
the transformer structure [146] was proposed in deep learning models,
the number of parameters in deep learning models exceeded 100
million, which is likely the earliest prototype of large models. Nowa­
days, the total number of parameters in large models has exceeded one
trillion. Large models have the same purpose as traditional models: to
assist people in understanding, analysing, and replaying the develop­
ment process of objective things, and evaluating and predicting their
future trends and outcomes. Unlike traditional models, large models
have more parameters and more powerful computing power, which can
better adapt to large-scale data and complex tasks. When processing
complex tasks, they can better capture the potential patterns in the data,
thereby improving the accuracy and versatility of the model. Today,
smart terminal devices such as smart watches and smartphones have
become the most common and frequently used tools in people’s lives.
With the help of these smart devices and ICT networks, the needs of
almost every resident can be accurately reflected to urban planners.
Therefore, the task of large models in urban modelling is to help urban
planners process massive amounts of resident demand data and assist in
making reasonable plans, as well as allocate urban resources more
efficiently.
Although machine learning has domenstrated remarkable perfor­
mance in urban studies, the application of machine learning in urban
studies is facing limitations and ethical risks.
On one hand, machine learning requires a large amount of highquality data for training and annotation. Acquiring such data and
ensuring its integrity and accuracy pose significant challenges. Addi­
tionally, annotating these data also involves substantial costs, including
time and financial resources. These factors pose difficulties and obsta­
cles to the promotion and application of machine learning in urban
studies.
On the other hand, the field of urban planning involves a large
amount of personal and sensitive data, such as population distribution,
income, age, occupation, and so on. Collecting and using these data
expose machine learning to ethical and legal risks. Furthermore, if a
machine learning model is trained with external interference, its pre­
dictions may be biased and unfair, potentially influencing the decisionmaking process of urban planning unfairly and affecting the overall
welfare of society.

than one urban centre. Meanwhile, urban system is an open system,
which constantly interacts with external systems by population, mate­
rial, energy and information exchange. Therefore, basis on those simple
models of urban morphology, multiple disciplines, such as trans­
portation and economic, have been involved in urban modelling. Fig. 8
shows the timeline of urban modelling development.
To understand the mechanism of urban development, elements of
cities such as natural and socioeconomic resources and population are
divided into many urban factors by character, for example educational,
medical, financial, working and other factors. The geographical distri­
bution of urban factors has played an important role in urban develop­
ment [8,138]. Concepts, such as urban structure and urban
agglomeration, have been proposed to analyses and describe the dis­
tribution and organization of urban land use and urban factors. Those
urban factors create driving forces of urbanization [113].
From a macro viewpoint, individual interaction behaviours between
urban factors are influenced by the context of macro trends. Those in­
dividuals are regarded as several groups and the behaviour of each
group will show homogeneity on a certain level. Based on that, topdown models, including the gravity model and entropy maximization,
have been proposed.
From a micro viewpoint, those urban factors will interact with others
subconsciously or unconsciously and spontaneously produce urban form
as consequence. This process is called “self-organization” [105–107].
Based on that, bottom-up models, which focus on the micro-level,
elemental or individualistic, to representing behaviours and in­
teractions of those objects through space and time [13], have been
developed, such as CA and agent-based models.
To reduce resource consumption and increase utilization efficiency,
several theories have been proposed. For example, optimal urban form
theories explore the relationship between urban size, the organization
form of urban factors and driving forces for urban developments. Smart
cities try to use ICT-based information systems to promote the level of
urban management and solve urban diseases that depreciate driving
forces for urban developments.
We expect that in the future, the connection between different dis­
ciplines involved in urban studies will become closer, especially in urban
planning, where urban land use and transportation planning need to be
integrated. Models of economics, transportation, geography, sociology,
and management are beginning to be integrated into a complex com­
posite. We believe that adjacent disciplines will merge first, such as land
science and transportation science, which will further develop an inte­
grated planning model for land and transportation based on the existing
models, such as LUTI models.
With the help of emerging technologies such as smart devices and
large models, future urban models may achieve macro and micro uni­
fication, and there will no longer be a clear distinction between topdown and bottom-up models. To handle these massive amounts of
data, based on the current development situation, we believe that ma­
chine learning is the technical foundation for the micro-macro integra­
tion of urban models, and the technical foundation for the integration of
multidisciplinary knowledge into multi-dimensional urban models.

5. Summary and conclusion

Jing Wang: Project administration, Funding acquisition. Gengze Li:
Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Resources, Project
administration, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.
Huapu Lu: Validation, Supervision, Project administration. Zhouhao
Wu: Resources, Software.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

In this paper, we have reviewed the development of urban models. In
the initial stage, location was the root point of urban study. A certain
region was dominated by the highest population density gradient zone,
which became the urban centre, and the urban centre was regarded as an
entry-point to study the relationship between urban centre location and
the distribution of urban factors. A series of simple models were created
to describe this pattern. For example, in the early 1920s, Ernest W.
Burges proposed his famous concentric-zone model [36,147] and
“wedge-shaped sectors” [37] . However, large cities usually have more

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
13

J. Wang et al.

Sustainable Futures 7 (2024) 100181

Fig. 8. Urban modelling development.

Data availability

[23] M. Batty, Urban modeling. International encyclopedia of Human Geography,
Elsevier, Oxford, 2009.
[24] Q. Bi, K.E. Goodman, J. Kaminsky, J. Lessler, What is machine learning? A primer
for the epidemiologist, Am. J. Epidemiol. 188 (2019) 2222–2239.
[25] L. Mumford, What is a city, Archit. Rec. 82 (1937) 59–62.
[26] R.T. LeGates, F. Stout, The City Reader, Routledge, 2015.
[27] V.G. Childe, The urban revolution, Town Plan. Rev. 21 (1950) 3.
[28] G. Sjoberg, The origin and evolution of cities, Sci. Am. 213 (1965) 54–62.
[29] X. Gabaix, Y.M. Ioannides, The Evolution of City Size distributions, in: Handbook
of Regional and Urban Economics, Elsevier, 2004, pp. 2341–2378.
[30] H.A. Makse, S. Havlin, H.E. Stanley, Modelling urban growth patterns, Nature
377 (1995) 608.
[31] Q. Yang, S. Wu, D. Lu, Preliminary study on geographical potential in regional
development [J], Econ. Geogr. (2003) 4.
[32] H.S. Sudhira, T.V. Ramachandra, K.S. Jagadish, Urban sprawl: metrics, dynamics
and modelling using GIS, Int. J. Appl. Earth Obs. Geoinf. 5 (2004) 29–39.
[33] Y.-H. Tsai, Quantifying urban form: compactness versus’ sprawl, Urban Stud. 42
(2005) 141–161.
[34] G. Li, F. Li, Urban sprawl in China: differences and socioeconomic drivers, Sci.
Total Environ. 673 (2019) 367–377.
[35] Burgess, E.W., 1929. Urban areas, an Experiment in Social Science Research.
Chic. Univ. Smith TV White LD Eds.
[36] W.B. Meyer, The other Burgess model, Urban Geogr 21 (2000) 261–270.
[37] H. Hoyt, The Structure and Growth of Residential Neighborhoods in American
cities, US Government Printing Office, 1939.
[38] K. Schwirian, Ecological Models of Urban Form: Concentric Zone Model, the
Sector Model, and the Multiple Nuclei Model, Blackwell Encycl. Sociol, 2007.
[39] L. Adolphe, A simplified model of urban morphology: application to an analysis of
the environmental performance of cities, Environ. Plan. B Plan. Des. 28 (2001)
183–200.
[40] D. Abuya, M. Oyugi, E. Oyaro, Management of the effects of land use changes on
urban infrastructure capacity: a case study of Ruaka Town, Kiambu County,
Kenya, Am. J. Geogr. Inf. Syst. 8 (2019) 158–190.
[41] G. Zhou, J. Zhang, C. Li, Y. Liu, Spatial pattern of functional urban land
conversion and expansion under rapid urbanization: a case study of Changchun,
China, Land (Basel) 11 (2022) 119.
[42] J.W. Forrester, Industrial Dynamics. A major breakthrough for decision makers,
Harv. Bus. Rev. 36 (1958) 37–66.
[43] S.P. Shepherd, A review of system dynamics models applied in transportation,
Transp. B Transp. Dyn. 2 (2014) 83–105.
[44] W.G. Hansen, How accessibility shapes land use, J. Am. Inst. Plann. 25 (1959)
73–76.
[45] I.S. Lowry, A Model of Metropolis, Rand Corp Santa Monica Calif, 1964.
[46] M. Batty, Progress, success, and failure in urban modelling, Environ. Plan. A 11
(1979) 863–878.
[47] D.B. Lee Jr, Requiem for large-scale models, J. Am. Inst. Plann. 39 (1973)
163–178.
[48] M. Batty, S. Mackie, The calibration of gravity, entropy, and related models of
spatial interaction, Environ. Plan. A 4 (1972) 205–233.
[49] Isard, W., 1956. Location and space-economy.
[50] W. Isard, The scope and nature of regional science, Pap. Reg. Sci. 6 (1960) 9–34.

No data was used for the research described in the article.
References
[1] P.H. Verburg, N. Crossman, E.C. Ellis, A. Heinimann, P. Hostert, O. Mertz,
H. Nagendra, T. Sikor, K.-H. Erb, N. Golubiewski, Land system science and
sustainable development of the earth system: a global land project perspective,
Anthropocene 12 (2015) 29–41.
[2] Christian, C.S., 1957. The concept of land units and land systems.
[3] D. Müller, D.K. Munroe, Current and Future Challenges in Land-Use Science,
Taylor & Francis, 2014.
[4] R. Aspinall, Editorial: land use science, J. Land Use Sci. 1 (2006) 1–4.
[5] P.H. Verburg, P. Alexander, T. Evans, N.R. Magliocca, Z. Malek, M.D. Rounsevell,
J. van Vliet, Beyond land cover change: towards a new generation of land use
models, Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain. 38 (2019) 77–85.
[6] R.J. Johnston, City and society: An outline For Urban Geography, Routledge,
2013.
[7] P.J. Rimmer, Transport geography, Prog. Hum. Geogr. 12 (1988) 270–281.
[8] M. Batty, Cities and complexity: Understanding Cities With Cellular automata,
Agent-Based models, and Fractals, a, The MIT press, 2007.
[9] C. Kennedy, J. Cuddihy, J. Engel-Yan, The changing metabolism of cities, J. Ind.
Ecol. 11 (2007) 43–59.
[10] C. Kennedy, S. Pincetl, P. Bunje, The study of urban metabolism and its
applications to urban planning and design, Environ. Pollut. 159 (2011)
1965–1973.
[11] A. Wolman, The metabolism of cities, Sci. Am. 213 (1965) 178–193.
[12] P.M. Allen, M. Sanglier, Dynamic models of urban growth, J. Soc. Biol. Struct. 1
(1978) 265–280.
[13] M. Batty, Urban Modelling, a, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1976.
[14] b M. Batty, Complexity in city systems: understanding, evolution, and design, in:
G Roo, EA Silva (Eds.), Complexity in city systems: understanding, evolution, and
design, Planner’s Encount. Complex (2007) 99–122.
[15] M. Batty, Fifty years of urban modeling: macro-statics to micro-dynamics. The
Dynamics of Complex Urban Systems, Springer, 2008, pp. 1–20.
[16] D. Foot, Operational Urban models: an Introduction, Routledge, 2017.
[17] R. Cordera, Á. Ibeas, L. dell’Olio, B. Alonso, Land Use–Transport Interaction
Models, CRC press, 2017.
[18] E. Borukhov, Optimality in city size and systems of cities: a comment, Urban Stud
12 (1975) 325–328.
[19] X. Guan, H. Wei, S. Lu, Q. Dai, H. Su, Assessment on the urbanization strategy in
China: achievements, challenges and reflections, Habitat Int 71 (2018) 97–109.
[20] R. Arnott, Optimal city size in a spatial economy, J. Urban Econ. 6 (1979) 65–89.
[21] R. Capello, R. Camagni, Beyond optimal city size: an evaluation of alternative
urban growth patterns, Urban Stud 37 (2000) 1479–1496.
[22] O. Fisch, Optimal city size, the economic theory of clubs and exclusionary zoning,
Public Choice 24 (1975) 59–70.

14

J. Wang et al.

Sustainable Futures 7 (2024) 100181
[84] R. White, G. Engelen, High-resolution integrated modelling of the spatial
dynamics of urban and regional systems, Comput. Environ. Urban Syst. 24 (2000)
383–400.
[85] Y. Feng, X. Tong, A new cellular automata framework of urban growth modeling
by incorporating statistical and heuristic methods, Int. J. Geogr. Inf. Sci. 34
(2020) 74–97.
[86] M.D.A. Rounsevell, A. Arneth, P. Alexander, D.G. Brown, N. de Noblet-Ducoudré,
E. Ellis, J. Finnigan, K. Galvin, N. Grigg, I. Harman, Towards decision-based
global land use models for improved understanding of the Earth system, Earth
Syst. Dyn. 5 (2014) 117.
[87] B.C. Pijanowski, A. Tayyebi, J. Doucette, B.K. Pekin, D. Braun, J. Plourde, A big
data urban growth simulation at a national scale: configuring the GIS and neural
network based land transformation model to run in a high performance
computing (HPC) environment, Environ. Model. Softw. 51 (2014) 250–268.
[88] P.V. Thakuriah, N.Y. Tilahun, M. Zellner, Big data and urban informatics:
innovations and challenges to urban planning and knowledge discovery. Seeing
Cities through Big Data, Springer, 2017, pp. 11–45.
[89] G. Grekousis, Artificial neural networks and deep learning in urban geography: a
systematic review and meta-analysis, Comput. Environ. Urban Syst. 74 (2019)
244–256.
[90] J.P. Simon, Artificial intelligence: scope, players, markets and geography, Digit.
Policy Regul. Gov. (2019).
[91] C.-Y. Man, O.F. Shyr, Y.-Y. Hsu, S. Shepherd, H.-L. Lin, C.-H. Tu, Tourism,
transport, and land use: a dynamic impact assessment for Kaohsiung’s Asia New
Bay Area, J. Simul. 14 (2020) 304–315.
[92] M. Batty, Urban Modelling, b, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1976.
[93] 牛方曲刘卫东宋涛 Fangqu Niu, Weidong Liu, Tao Song, LUTI 模型原理, 实现及应
用综述 (Theory implementation and applicatioins of LUTI model), 人文地理
(Human Geogr.) 29 (2014) 31–35, 118.
[94] J.W. Forrester, J.W. Forrester, Urban Dynamics, 114, mIt press, Cambridge, 1969.
[95] P. Sanders, F. Sanders, Spatial urban dynamics, in: Proceedings of the 2004
International System Dynamics Conference, Oxford, UK, 2004.
[96] N. Gilbert, Agent-based Models, Sage Publications, 2019. Incorporated.
[97] Y. Li, M. Chen, Z. Dou, X. Zheng, Y. Cheng, A. Mebarki, A review of cellular
automata models for crowd evacuation, Phys. Stat. Mech. Its Appl. (2019).
[98] Z. Yang, Development of optimal city size theory: a critical view, J. Resour. Ecol.
11 (2020) 100–110.
[99] W. Alonso, Location and land use, Toward a general theory of land rent. Locat.
Land Use Gen. Theory Land Rent. (1964).
[100] A. Anas, T. Hiramatsu, The effect of the price of gasoline on the urban economy:
from route choice to general equilibrium, Transp. Res. Part Policy Pract. 46
(2012) 855–873.
[101] 万励金鹰 Li Wan, Jin Ying, 国外应用城市模型发展回顾与新型空间政策模型综述
(Review on applied urban modeling and new trends of urban spatial plocy
models), 城市规划学刊 (Urban Plann. Forum) 1 (2014) 81–91.
[102] A. Anas, T. Hiramatsu, RELU-TRAN: applications and challenges, 国際公共政策研
究 16 (2011) 153–162.
[103] T.W. Hertel, S. Rose, S. RICHARD, Land use in computable general equilibrium
models: an overview. Economic Analysis of Land Use in Global Climate Change
Policy, Routledge, 2009, pp. 23–50.
[104] A. Anas, Y. Liu, A regional economy, land use, and transportation model (relutran©): formulation, algorithm design, and testing, J. Reg. Sci. 47 (2007)
415–455.
[105] P.M. Allen, M. Sanglier, Urban evolution, self-organization, and decision making,
Environ. Plan. A 13 (1981) 167–183.
[106] W.R. Ashby, Principles of the self-organizing system. Facets of Systems Science,
Springer, 1991, pp. 521–536.
[107] B. Boonstra, L. Boelens, Self-organization in urban development: towards a new
perspective on spatial planning, Urban Res. Pract. 4 (2011) 99–122.
[108] J. Liu, J. Zhan, X. Deng, Spatio-temporal patterns and driving forces of urban land
expansion in China during the economic reform era, AMBIO J. Hum. Environ. 34
(2005) 450–456.
[109] N.R. Council, G.S. Committee, Advancing Land Change modeling: Opportunities
and Research Requirements, National Academies Press, 2014.
[110] A. Crooks, C. Castle, M. Batty, Key challenges in agent-based modelling for geospatial simulation, Comput. Environ. Urban Syst. 32 (2008) 417–430.
[111] P. Perez, A. Banos, C. Pettit, Agent-based Modelling For Urban Planning Current
Limitations and Future trends, in: International Workshop On Agent Based
Modelling of Urban Systems, Springer, 2016, pp. 60–69.
[112] M. Wegener, The future of mobility in cities: challenges for urban modelling,
Transp. Policy 29 (2013) 275–282.
[113] C. Gu, Urbanization: processes and driving forces, Sci. China Earth Sci. 62 (2019)
1351–1360.
[114] M. Batty, Can it happen again? Planning support, Lee’s Requiem and the rise of
the smart cities movement, Environ. Plan. B Plan. Des. 41 (2014) 388–391.
[115] R.F. Tomlinson, A geographical information system for regional planning, in:
Papers of a CSIRO Symposium Organized in Cooperation with UNESCO 26-31
August 1968, Macmillan of Australia, 1968.
[116] M.F. Goodchild, GIS in the era of big data, Cybergeo Eur. J. Geogr. (2016).
[117] A. Wolman, The metabolism of cities, Sci. Am. 213 (1965) 178–193.
[118] C. Kennedy, J. Cuddihy, J. Engel-Yan, The changing metabolism of cities, J. Ind.
Ecol. 11 (2007) 43–59.
[119] D. Julong, Introduction to grey system theory, J. Grey Syst. 1 (1989) 1–24.
[120] W.R. Ashby, Principles of the self-organizing system. Facets of Systems Science,
Springer, 1991, pp. 521–536.

[51] K.F. Wieand, An extension of the monocentric urban spatial equilibrium model to
a multicenter setting: the case of the two-center city, J. Urban Econ. 21 (1987)
259–271.
[52] M. Batty, A generic framework for computational spatial modelling. Agent-Based
Models of Geographical Systems, Springer, 2012, pp. 19–50.
[53] F. Niu, J. Li, An activity-based integrated land-use transport model for urban
spatial distribution simulation, Environ. Plan. B Urban Anal. City Sci. 46 (2019)
165–178.
[54] M. Wegener, Overview of land-use transport models, Handb. Transp. Geogr. Spat.
Syst. 5 (2004) 127–146.
[55] D. Banister, N. Lichfield, The key issues in transport and urban development.
Transport and Urban Development, Routledge, 2003, pp. 11–26.
[56] A. Gospodini, Urban development, redevelopment and regeneration encouraged
by transport infrastructure projects: the case study of 12 European cities, Eur.
Plan. Stud. 13 (2005) 1083–1111.
[57] P. Pfaffenbichler, G. Emberger, S. Shepherd, The integrated dynamic land use and
transport model MARS, Netw. Spat. Econ. 8 (2008) 183–200.
[58] 牛方曲 Fangqu Niu, LUTI 模型的概念结构, 实现方法及发展趋势 (Overview of
urban land-use/transport interaction model: origin, techniques and future), 地理
科学 (Scientia Geographica Sinica) 37 (2017) 46–54.
[59] K.T. Geurs, B. Van Wee, Land-use/transport interaction models as tools for
sustainability impact assessment of transport investments: review and research
perspectives, Eur. J. Transp. Infrastruct. Res. 4 (2004) 333–355.
[60] A. Wilson, Boltzmann, Lotka and Volterra and spatial structural evolution: an
integrated methodology for some dynamical systems, J. R. Soc. Interface 5 (2008)
865–871.
[61] M. Batty, C. Vargas, D. Smith, J. Serras, J. Reades, A. Johansson, SIMULACRA:
fast land-use—transportation models for the rapid assessment of urban futures,
Environ. Plan. B Plan. Des. 40 (2013) 987–1002.
[62] A. Ford, R. Dawson, P. Blythe, S. Barr, Land-use transport models for climate
change mitigation and adaptation planning, J. Transp. Land Use 11 (2018)
83–101.
[63] H. Lu, J. Wang, P. Zhang, Urban transport structure optimization based on energy
consumption, J.-Tsinghua Univ. 44 (2004) 383–386.
[64] P.H. Verburg, K.-H. Erb, O. Mertz, G. Espindola, Land System Science: Between
Global Challenges and Local Realities, Elsevier, 2013.
[65] L. An, Modeling human decisions in coupled human and natural systems: review
of agent-based models, Ecol. Model. 229 (2012) 25–36.
[66] M. Mitchell, M. Newman, Complex systems theory and evolution, Encycl. Evol.
(2002) 1–5.
[67] D.G. Green, S. Sadedin, Interactions matter—complexity in landscapes and
ecosystems, Ecol. Complex. 2 (2005) 117–130.
[68] 戴尔阜马良杨微石王亚慧尹乐童苗 Erbu Dai, Liang Ma, Weishi Yang, Yahui Wang,
Le Yin, Miao Tong, 土地系统多主体模型的理论与应用 (Agent based model of land
system: theory, application and modelling framework), 地理学报 (Acta
Geographica Sinica) 74 (2019) 2260–2272.
[69] A.R. Smith III, Cellular automata complexity trade-offs, Inf. Control 18 (1971)
466–482.
[70] S. Wolfram, Universality and complexity in cellular automata, Phys. Nonlinear
Phenom. 10 (1984) 1–35.
[71] D. Stevens, S. Dragićević, A GIS-based irregular cellular automata model of landuse change, Environ. Plan. B Plan. Des. 34 (2007) 708–724.
[72] X. Li, Y. Chen, X. Liu, D. Li, J. He, Concepts, methodologies, and tools of an
integrated geographical simulation and optimization system, Int. J. Geogr. Inf.
Sci. 25 (2011) 633–655.
[73] I. Santé, A.M. García, D. Miranda, R. Crecente, Cellular automata models for the
simulation of real-world urban processes: a review and analysis, Landsc. Urban
Plan. 96 (2010) 108–122.
[74] X. Li, P. Gong, Urban growth models: progress and perspective, Sci. Bull. 61
(2016) 1637–1650.
[75] J.D. Farmer, D. Foley, The economy needs agent-based modelling, Nature 460
(2009) 685.
[76] D. Valbuena, P.H. Verburg, A.K. Bregt, A. Ligtenberg, An agent-based approach to
model land-use change at a regional scale, Landsc. Ecol. 25 (2010) 185–199.
[77] D.G. Brown, D.T. Robinson, Effects of heterogeneity in residential preferences on
an agent-based model of urban sprawl, Ecol. Soc. (2006) 11.
[78] P. Davidsson, L. Henesey, L. Ramstedt, J. Törnquist, F. Wernstedt, An analysis of
agent-based approaches to transport logistics, Transp. Res. Part C Emerg.
Technol. 13 (2005) 255–271.
[79] D.G. Brown, R. Riolo, D.T. Robinson, M. North, W. Rand, Spatial process and data
models: toward integration of agent-based models and GIS, J. Geogr. Syst. 7
(2005) 25–47.
[80] J. Gil-Quijano, T. Louail, G. Hutzler, From biological to urban cells: lessons from
three multilevel agent-based models, in: International Conference on Principles
and Practice of Multi-Agent Systems, Springer, 2010, pp. 620–635.
[81] C. Le Page, D. Bazile, N. Becu, P. Bommel, F. Bousquet, M. Etienne, R. Mathevet,
V. Souchere, G. Trébuil, J. Weber, Agent-based modelling and simulation applied
to environmental management. Simulating Social Complexity, Springer, 2017,
pp. 569–613.
[82] D.C. Parker, S.M. Manson, M.A. Janssen, M.J. Hoffmann, P. Deadman, Multiagent systems for the simulation of land-use and land-cover change: a review,
Ann. Assoc. Am. Geogr. 93 (2003) 314–337.
[83] E.F. Lambin, H.J. Geist, E. Lepers, Dynamics of land-use and land-cover change in
tropical regions, Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour. 28 (2003) 205–241.

15

J. Wang et al.

Sustainable Futures 7 (2024) 100181
[135] V.K. Aggarwal, C.E. Morrison, Asia-Pacific crossroads: Regime creation and the
Future of APEC, St. Martin’s Press, New York, 1998.
[136] L. Wan, Y. Yun, J. Ni, The geo-space of Taobao village in China: theoretical
framework based on space of flows, City Plan. Rev. 41 (2017) 27–34.
[137] P.G. Hall, K. Pain, The Polycentric metropolis: Learning from Mega-City Regions
in Europe, Routledge, 2006.
[138] R. Osborne, Urban sprawl: what is urbanization and why does it matter?, in:
Proceedings-British Academy Oxford University Press INC., 2005, p. 1.
[139] J. Wang, F. Biljecki, Unsupervised machine learning in urban studies: a systematic
review of applications, Cities 129 (2022) 103925, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cities.2022.103925.
[140] A. Albert, E. Strano, J. Kaur, M. González, Modeling urbanization patterns with
generative adversarial networks, in: IGARSS 2018-2018 IEEE International
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, IEEE, 2018, pp. 2095–2098.
[141] C. Chen, Z. Liu, S. Wan, J. Luan, Q. Pei, Traffic flow prediction based on deep
learning in internet of vehicles, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 22 (2020)
3776–3789.
[142] J. Wang, M. Bretz, M.A.A. Dewan, M.A. Delavar, Machine learning in modelling
land-use and land cover-change (LULCC): current status, challenges and
prospects, Sci. Total Environ. 822 (2022) 153559, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2022.153559.
[143] L. Lin, L. Di, C. Zhang, L. Guo, H. Zhao, D. Islam, H. Li, Z. Liu, G. Middleton,
Modeling urban redevelopment: a novel approach using time-series remote
sensing data and machine learning, Geogr. Sustain. (2024), https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.geosus.2024.02.001.
[144] Y. Kim, A. Safikhani, E. Tepe, Machine learning application to spatio-temporal
modeling of urban growth, Comput. Environ. Urban Syst. 94 (2022) 101801,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2022.101801.
[145] G. Montavon, W. Samek, K.-R. Müller, Methods for interpreting and
understanding deep neural networks, Digit. Signal Process. 73 (2018) 1–15.
[146] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A.N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser,
I. Polosukhin, Attention is all you need, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (2017) 30.
[147] B. Ernest, Concentric Zone" Model of Urban Structure and Land Use, Landmark
Publ, 1925, p. 125.

[121] M. Fujita, P. Krugman, T. Mori, On the evolution of hierarchical urban systems,
Eur. Econ. Rev. 43 (1999) 209–251.
[122] G. Li, S. Wang, J. Li, The transport impedance disparity indicator: a case study of
Xi’an, China. Environ. Sustain. Indic. (2023) 100257, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
indic.2023.100257.
[123] L. Zhou, L. Wei, D. López-Carr, X. Dang, B. Yuan, Z. Yuan, Identification of
irregular extension features and fragmented spatial governance within urban
fringe areas, Appl. Geogr. 162 (2024) 103172, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apgeog.2023.103172.
[124] A. Caragliu, C. Del Bo, P. Nijkamp, Smart cities in Europe, J. Urban Technol. 18
(2011) 65–82.
[125] R.G. Hollands, Will the real smart city please stand up? City: analysis of urban
trend, culture, theory, Policy Action 12 (2008) 303–320.
[126] J.M. Shapiro, Smart cities: quality of life, productivity, and the growth effects of
human capital, Rev. Econ. Stat. 88 (2006) 324–335.
[127] L. Shen, Z. Huang, S.W. Wong, S. Liao, Y. Lou, A holistic evaluation of smart city
performance in the context of China, J. Clean. Prod. 200 (2018) 667–679.
[128] H. Wang, M. Zhang, M. Zhong, Opportunities and challenges for the construction
of a smart city geo-spatial framework in a small urban area in central China,
Smart Cities 2 (2019) 245–258.
[129] S. Greenfield, Tomorrow’s people: How 21st-century Technology is Changing the
Way We Think and Feel, Penguin UK, 2004.
[130] R.P. Dameri, F. Ricciardi, Leveraging smart city projects for benefitting citizens:
the role of ICTs. Smart City Networks, Springer, 2017, pp. 111–128.
[131] D. Tapscott, The Digital economy: Promise and Peril in the Age of Networked
Intelligence, McGraw-Hill New York, 1996.
[132] Y. Lin, E-urbanism: e-commerce, migration, and the transformation of Taobao
villages in urban China, Cities 91 (2019) 202–212.
[133] M. Foth, P. Mitchell, C. Estrada-Grajales, Today’s internet for tomorrow’s cities:
on algorithmic culture and urban imaginaries, Second Int. Handb. Internet Res.
(2020) 725–746.
[134] L. Zhendong, H. Heming, L. Caige, A new bottom-up process: the rural
urbanization driven by e-commerce in China, China City Plan. Rev. 26 (2017).

16

