Barrios Avalos, J. J., & Franquesa Sánchez, J. (2023). Urban Restructuring of Agricultural
Productive Models in Hydrographic Basins Under Water stress. the Case of the Nazas
and Aguanaval Rivers. archiDOCT, 19(11 (1)).

ArchiDOCT 19, 11 (1) TEMPORALITIES ii

Urban Restructuring of Agricultural Productive Models in
Hydrographic Basins Under Water stress. the Case of the Nazas and
Aguanaval Rivers
Juan José Barrios Avalos1, Jordi Franquesa Sánchez, PhD Arch.1

a

1 Departament d'Urbanisme i Ordenació del Territori, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya

Keywords: Stream restoration, water urbanism, hydrographic basin, water stress, urban restructuring

archiDOCT
Vol. 19, Issue 11 (1), 2023

The history of a town is often the history of its water. Managing and distributing water
resources makes a huge impact on the transformation of the territory, even more so in
contexts where water scarcity is increasing, either due to site specific geographic
conditions, production dynamics or the effects of climate change. The urban and rural
cores within the limits of the hydrographic basins introduce alterations to the hydric
dynamics through logics of occupation and growth on the territory, and by the
interaction of its pieces with the hydrological infrastructure. These logics are configured
in a determined space-time, coexist in their current form and as a sequel to the territorial
present. It is through temporality that they can be understood to determine their future
in the urban-water system.
Fluvial restoration and urban planning must have a boundary-driven, multi-scope
approach: on the flows of the productive territory, the large agricultural areas, and the
hydrological infrastructure. Dams, wells and canals must be fundamental elements in the
restructuring. This article presents the case of the Nazas-Aguanaval hydrographic region.
One of the main objectives of this research is to identify the agro-productive models of
the basin and its dynamics with the hydrological infrastructure.
The article shows that the water stabilization of the region depends on the urban
restructuring of all its populations and its synergies with agro-productive processes,
through the analysis of its logics sustained and modified over time. Temporality as a
structural tool for analysis is essential to develop fluvial restoration strategies in basins
under hydric stress.

a I am architect an town planner, and professor at the Architecture School in Barcelona (ETSAB), in the Urbanism and Regional Plan-

ning Department, from 1996. The doctoral thesis “A rediscovered urban experience. Garden Communities in Catalunya” obtained
the qualification of Excellent Laude, and also obtained the Extraordinary Doctorate Award of the UPC, which resulted in the publication of the work in a book. The line of research on low-density residency allowed me to deepen my research and the publication
of some articles in different indexed journals, and also encouraged my first active participation in a consolidated R+D project on
the rehabilitation of monofunctional residential areas, and specifically urbanizations. During this period of intense research, I gave
lectures on low-density residency in different countries, including Brazil (Goiânia), Venice, Lisbon, Holland and Mexico. Since 2012 I
am part of the Urban Planning Research Group (GRU), a consolidated research group of the Generalitat de Catalunya.
During the last four years I have led a line of research on repopulation and rural development that aims to seek a necessary territorial rebalancing of human settlements and the revitalization of the territory. The period of confinement derived from COVID has
generated pressure on rural land, and it is necessary to take advantage of this trend to revitalize the territories and boost their
economy, take advantage of the environmental asset and improve the social conditions of rural communities. I have carried out
numerous workshops and subjects on rural repopulation, and I have recently led the strategic plan for rural revitalization in Central
Catalonia. From the Department of Urbanism and Regional Planning of the ETSAB I’m carrying out numerous research studies on
this topic, and several exhibitions have been held on this topic.
In parallel to this line of work, my concern about teaching architecture and improving the learning of university students gradually
opened up a new field of research. In order to provide a more solid structure to this concern, in 2012 I founded, together with two
colleagues, the new GILDA research group, “Group for Innovation and Teaching Logistics in Architecture”, of which I am director,
and is considered an emerging group by the UPC. At the same time, the position of Head of Studies of the ETSAB during 2014-2018
has allowed me to know the real possibilities of the implementation of teaching methodologies in undergraduate courses and to
obtain some experiences that have contributed to improving teaching in the following years.
The teaching innovation also involved the participation as PI of the ETSAB in the international project Erasmus+ “Confronting
Wicked Problems. Adapting Architectural Education to the New Situation in Europe”, developed between 2015 and 2017, with the
participation of different European schools in research on the relationship between university teaching and professional activity,
which has resulted in the preparation of a document of criteria that I directed.

Urban Restructuring of Agricultural Productive Models in Hydrographic Basins Under Water stress. the Cas…

1. Introduction
In Mexico, high rates of hydric stress are observed in
certain hydrographic basins due to the intense degree of
pressure exerted on surface waters in conjunction with the
contamination of aquifers. This is a consequence of the
low integration of productive processes with the ecosystem,
which finally causes alterations in the hydrological cycle.
This phenomenon is more evident in mono-productive
communities of agricultural and/or extractive scenarios.
In particular, central and northwestern Mexico present a
high degree of pressure on water resources. These regions
use up to 40% of the available renewable water in the basin
for agricultural production. In these areas, in addition to
finding kilometers of irrigation canals woven between the
agricultural fields that also cross the urban fabric, there are
large dams for storage and distribution of water in order to
serve the agricultural cycles of the irrigation districts. According to the estimates of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO, 2011) Mexico ranks 7th in the world classification of countries with the highest water extraction and
percentage of agricultural use with a total of 87,84 thousand million m3/year. Of this total, 76% is used for agricultural activities (CONAGUA, 2018). According to the projections of the World Water Assessment Program (WWAP) of
UNESCO, by the year 2050, agricultural activity will need to
increase its production by 60% globally. Developing countries will need to increase production by 100%.
Consequently, the values of virtual water for basic products suggest that the hydrographic basins should be protected and the communities within their limits restructured
to safeguard the hydrological cycle. These values include:
15.415 liters needed to produce 1 kilogram of beef, 1.222
liters per kilogram of corn, and 1.000 liters of water needed
to procure 1 liter of milk (Arreguín Cortés et al., 2007;
CONAGUA, 2018).
By determining water as the guiding axis of urban narrative, this research leans towards a water efficient urbanism.
To generate urban proposals compatible with basin restoration, it is necessary to analyze the structure of the territory
in all its components. In this field of territorial vision, the
contributions of Xabier Eizaguirre (1990; 2019) are a valuable theoretical core, as well as the contributions of SolàMorales (1973; Manuel Solà-Morales, 1989) and Giuseppe
Dematteis (2004). But also, practical approaches in the
Mexican context, such as the efforts of Mario Schjetnan
(2020) to value the roots of agricultural landscape and more

specific analysis such as: Chairez Araiza (2005) in studying
the impact of river regulation in the Laguna region. The
objective is to combine the cartographic information available on indicators of water quality, degree of pressure on
water resources, and agricultural production surfaces, with
urban morphological information within the limits of the
hydrographic basins, to build hydric-urban indicators and
by them generate restructuring strategies for hydro-agricultural infrastructure and urban restructuring plans. The
foregoing, to reformulate the agricultural mono-productive
models present in the basins under hydric stress, in models
that contribute to the objectives of hydric stabilization.
Theoretical approaches to urban planning through the
use of the hydrographic basin as a unit of urban analysis
are in constant evolution. Regarding analysis and management, the next publications can be cited: (Dourojeanni et
al., 2002), (Pallarés Serrano, 2007. From an instrumental
view: (Leopold, 1968), (Hernández-Tapia, 2017), (Acosta et
al., 2015), (Rotger, 2019), (Suárez López et al., 2014),
(Duque & Echeverry, 2015), (Gómez et al., 2011). Also in
the urban environment, there are approximations of a more
epistemological order such as: (Vian et al., 2020),
(Domínguez Serrano, 2013), (Escudé, 2010).

2. Hydrological Region 36, Irrigation District 017
and Irrigation Units
1

Hydrological region 36 is composed by 5 main basins
subdivided into 33 sub-basins (Table.01). Together, they
contain an area of 90,634.65 km2, in a perimeter of 3,312.43
km2. A total of 1.125 towns are located on this area, of
2
which 1.058 are rural and 67 are urban. The sub-basin is
the minimum unit of geospatial information provided by
3
CONAGUA, falling outside smaller units such as the micro4
basin or the urban basin. The RH36 contains the defined
limits of 27 aquifers, of which 9 are overexploited. They
are those located in the Laguna region where the largest
amount of population in the hydrographic region is concentrated.
The hydrographic system contains the Nazas and Agua5
naval rivers. Both endorheic channels flow into the lowlands of the hydrological region where a set of lagoons were
once located, now dried up, including the Mayran lagoon
(Nazas river) and the Viesca lagoon (Aguanaval river). The
lower zone of RH36 lacks a constant flow in the natural
courses of the Nazas and Aguanaval rivers, due to the effects of climate change, but mainly due to the construction

1 The hydrographic basins in Mexico (757) are organized into 37 hydrological regions (RH), these regions represent 13 administrative hy-

drological regions (RHA) (CONAGUA, 2018, p. 30). In this research, the RH is the study area limit because contains units defined by geographic relief and not by political-administrative boundaries such as the RH.

2 In Mexico, the distinction between a rural and an urban town is made by its population size. This indicator, defined by the National In-

stitute of Statistics and Geography of Mexico, specifies that any community with more than 2,500 inhabitants is urban.

3 National Water Commission. Mexico.
4 The limits of the aquifers identified by CONAGUA do not coincide entirely with the limits of the hydrographic basins, however, they are

close, making it possible to group them within the hydrographic region.

5 Is a closed basin that drains internally into lakes or swamps. An exorheic basin drains to a river or the ocean.

archiDOCT

2

Urban Restructuring of Agricultural Productive Models in Hydrographic Basins Under Water stress. the Cas…

of hydro-agricultural infrastructure between the decades of
1940-1970, through the incorporation of dams and irrigation canals. The hydro-agricultural infrastructure serves ir6
rigation district 017, located in the RHA Laguna Region
VII, which extends over 71.964 has, 49.835 are irrigated
with surface water, the rest with groundwater (CONAGUA,
7
2018, p. 288). Additionally, irrigation units (UR) with a
planted area of 295.723 has are added to this irrigated area.
Paradoxically, despite the large amounts of water needed to
produce milk, beef, or crops to feed cattle, the Laguna region is a large producer of dairy products and derivatives,
dominant in Mexico and the American continent. This
mono-productive cycle transforms the water resources of
the RH36 into export products, compromising the return of
the water in the basin to its natural cycle.
The environmental problems of RH36 and DR017 are
linked to poor management of water resources at the basin
level. In addition to the scarcity of water in the Nazas and
Aguanaval riverbeds in the lower basin, the aquifers have
been at extreme levels of exploitation for decades that exceed recharge capacities due to the intensification of the
pumping volume. The low availability of surface water is
8
concentrated in 75% for small owners and 25% for ejido
communities (Cruz & Levine, 1998, p. 23). Under these circumstances, the rural-agricultural and urban-agricultural
model of the region, (both of the mono-productive order)
cause unsustainable stress for the hydrographic region. It is
necessary to establish water balance strategies by reordering their models.

3. Method
Integration of geospatial data with hydric
information
Through GIS (Geographic Information System), the main
vector data of water quality indicators and the degree of
9
pressure on water resources provided by the SINA are inte-

grated. The superposition and geolocation of these indicators facilitates the observation of basins with high values of
hydric stress in their geographical limits. The incorporated
data for reading the hydric alterations in the hydrographic
basins are listed in Figure 1.
Additionally, the analysis of water quality indicators is
complemented by the publications: Estadísticas del agua en
México 2018 and Atlas del agua en México 2018 in order to
obtain a holistic view of the state of surface and groundwater.

Construction of hydric-urban cartography
To build hydro-urban cartographic information compatible with the geospatial data of the hydrographic basins,
and the available cultivation surfaces in the Mexican territory, an organization and hierarchy of the information
layers is carried out with the help of GIS software, using
a multi-scale approach from the geographic to the urban
scale. Geostatistical data in vector format provided by IN10
EGI, RAN and SINA are used. The information used is
listed in Figure 2.

Building footprint data generation
In Mexico, building footprint vector data is not accessible on the INEGI open data system. At the cadastral level,
11
cartographic information is decentralized, and consequently depends on state and municipal administrations. In
the RH36, the geospatial data of the buildings is not available in the majority of the cadastral institutes of the urban
localities, nor in the rural communities of the basin. The
efforts of the cadastral institutes are concentrated on homologating maps in raster format and do not have carto12
graphic databases under an open data standard. For this
reason, for a morphological analysis of all the towns of the
basin it is necessary to generate the building information.

6 “The DR are irrigation projects developed by the Federal government since 1926, the year the National Irrigation Commission was created, and

include various projects, such as storage vessels, direct diversions, pumping plants, wells, canals and roads, among others. To date there are 86
DR” (CONAGUA, 2018, p. 107).

7 "URs are agricultural areas with infrastructure and irrigation systems that are different from the irrigation districts and generally have a

smaller area. They can be integrated by user associations or other figures of organized producers, who associate with each other to provide the
irrigation service with autonomous management systems and operate the hydraulic infrastructure works for the collection, derivation, conduction, regulation and distribution and eviction of national waters destined for agricultural irrigation (CONAGUA, 2018, p. 110).

8 Developed with the agrarian reform and the agrarian law from 1915, is a type of land demarcation in Mexico. The organization of the

ejido is a structure of collective land, undivided and without the possibility of being sold or inherited.

9 National Water Information System of Mexico.
10 National Agrarian Registry. Mexico.
11 "The different levels of knowledge of the staff of each institution, the unequal allocation of resources, the different purposes of each responsible

institution, changes in government administrations, among other situations, have motivated each agency to establish its own rules for the recruitment, generation, integration and dissemination of cadastral information that is within its competence, thereby implying that there is heterogeneous cadastral information, which makes its integration and exchange difficult" (INEGI, 2015a, p. 1)

12 "There are municipalities that do not know their information in detail, do not have cadastral administrative records and do not safeguard and/

or document their activities with the level of detail that allows composing a cadastral trend or structure at the national level" (INEGI, 2015b, p.
10)

archiDOCT

3

Urban Restructuring of Agricultural Productive Models in Hydrographic Basins Under Water stress. the Cas…

Figure 1. SINA (Water Quality)
Source: Author. Information from: CONAGUA (2018).

Figure 2. Main available geostatistical information for RH36
Source: Author. Information from: INEGI, RAN and SINA.

There are multiple vector generation techniques based
on the analysis of high-resolution images in raster format
resulting from geospatial information (Gede et al., 2020).
13
These methods include: semantic segmentation, neural
14
15
16
networks, machine learning, or artificial intelligence.
All these technics can be used, in combination with GIS

software for the extraction of vector information in specific
geographic markers (Li et al., 2019), (Boos, 2018), (Borba
et al., 2021). However, for the implementation of the mentioned tools, it is necessary to have high-resolution satellite images, and in those cases where there are no highresolution records in the requested coordinates, manual

13 “Semantic segmentation aims to assign a categorical label to every pixel in an image, which plays an important role in image understanding

and self-driving systems” (Wang et al., 2018, p. 1451).

14 "Neural networks are a wide class of flexible nonlinear regression and discriminant models, data reduction models, and nonlinear dynamical

systems. They consist of an often large number of “neurons,” i.e. simple linear or nonlinear computing elements, interconnected in often complex ways and often organized into layers" (Sarle, 1994, p. 1).

15 "Machine-learning systems are used to identify objects in images, transcribe speech into text, match news items, posts or products with users’

interests, and select relevant results of search. Increasingly, these applications make use of a class of techniques called deep learning" (LeCun et
al., 2015, p. 436).

16 "It is the science and engineering of making intelligent machines, especially intelligent computer programs. It is related to the similar task of us-

ing computers to understand human intelligence, but AI does not have to confine itself to methods that are biologically observable" (McCarthy,
2004, p. 2).

archiDOCT

4

Urban Restructuring of Agricultural Productive Models in Hydrographic Basins Under Water stress. the Case of the Nazas and Aguanaval Rivers

Figure 3. RH36 Multiscale hydro-urban analysis

archiDOCT

5

Urban Restructuring of Agricultural Productive Models in Hydrographic Basins Under Water stress. the Cas…

vectorization is required. In order to generate the building
information of the RH36 basins, a hybrid model is chosen,
through the manual vectorization of medium resolution
raster images and the use of semantic segmentation algorithm OTB-Segmentation included in QGIS this method allows obtaining a vectorial classification based on morphological profiles or basins.

Urban and rural agricultural models
In the context of this research, the model is composed by
the urban or rural form of the community (streets, parcels,
buildings), the productive agricultural surfaces, and their
hydrological infrastructures. This composition enables a
joint analysis of the productive flows and dynamics related
to the consumption of water resources within the limits of
the hydrographic basin.

4. Urban restructuring
With all the communities cataloged within the limits of
the RH36, indicators are constructed combining the morpho-typological characteristics and the consumptive uses
of water. The generation of these hydric-urban markers enables to visualize the territories under greater water pressure with urban and productive dynamics incompatible
with a fluvial restoration project. Through this analysis,
strategic criteria can be established for regional urban reorganization, in order to reduce the degree of pressure on
water resources.
The results of the analysis on the urban and rural communities of the basin, based on the examination of the hydric resources dynamics, enables a geographic-urban approach
to
urban
planning
rather
than
a
political-administrative approximation. The local instruments defined by the individual administrations of the
states and municipalities should be adapted to the basin
regulations, in the processes of city and housing construction.
Finally, it is pertinent to establish that the restructuring
must protect the project logics of the communities (Raffa,
2022) that has best combined with the natural context in its
temporal dimension (Bartorila & Loredo-Cansino, 2021).
To achieve this, it is necessary to analyze the historical urban operations and fundamental transformations through
their link with the use of water resources.

Restructuring through analysis of morphological
patterns and water availability
The communities belonging to the basin must be restructured, according to their capacities, to provide protection to the regional hydrological cycle, and their importance for the fluvial restoration of the rivers.
Agro-productive models must adapt to a regional basin
logic. The forms of settlement that mainly affect the
riverbeds must be reorganized. For example: to reduce the
dynamics of contamination and overexploitation of
aquifers, it is necessary to build protection spaces on the
riverbanks and main recharge areas of the basin.

Restructuring of hydro-agricultural
infrastructure
Storage and distribution structures for water resources
have the potential to offer regional ecosystem services. This
quality is useful in territories under water stress. For example: protected spaces can be generated in the lower zone
of the RH36, these spaces can be planned as controlled areas for aquifer recharge. The modernization of dams, canals
and wells is essential to promote water stability. This modernization must be carried out considering the construction
dynamics and urban organization models.

5. Conclusions
As can be seen from the results obtained, the methodology developed in this research is applicable to various
hydrographic contexts. The quality of the results will be
related to the availability and accessibility of the information in each case. It can be concluded that it is possible
to integrate the databases of the main indicators of water
quality and availability of water resources, with the databases of urban systems, urban equipment, infrastructures
and streets to determine the degree of pressure that the
models of contemporary city, exert on water resources. The
degree of pressure on water resources can be determined
with the capabilities of the urban model to offer aquifer
recharge surfaces, agro-productive models that allow the
return of water to the ecosystem, and water-efficient construction systems for buildings.
In RH36, the proliferation of irrigation canals supported
by the hydro-agricultural infrastructure has allowed the
development of fluvio-dependent urban and rural models,
with mono-productive tendencies, which have pushed the
hydrographic reserves to the limit. These forms of anthropic organization are not compatible with a river
restoration project for the Nazas and Aguanaval riverbeds,
because their productive activities use water resources to
generate products that do not allow the return of water to
the hydrological cycle of the basin. The restructuring of all
the RH36 communities implies the re-densification of their
fabrics, the recategorization of productive spaces and the
reconversion of obsolete infrastructures on a basin scale.
Understanding the hydrological cycle of each basin allows us to understand the natural elementary units of the
fluvial morphology, and it is the task of a reordering strategy to combine the built environment values with the water
values, mainly in their materiality. It should also be noted
that, although the basins are the unit of study selected
for this research, these pieces are related on a larger scale
to the contiguous basins, functioning as hydrographic regions, until they reach the continental limits. The hydrological cycle is finally a global cycle, and the elemental
functionality depends on the understanding of the stages
from its smallest scale to its maximum global levels.
Submitted: June 17, 2022 GMT, Accepted: October 06, 2022
GMT

archiDOCT

6

Urban Restructuring of Agricultural Productive Models in Hydrographic Basins Under Water stress. the Case of the Nazas and Aguanaval Rivers

Figure 4. Restructuring based on hydro-urban indicators

archiDOCT

7

Urban Restructuring of Agricultural Productive Models in Hydrographic Basins Under Water stress. the Cas…

References

Acosta, F. M., Miguel, S., Fernandez, E., & Vorraber, L.
(2015). Instrumentos de gestión urbanística y
proyectos socio ambientales en las cuencas del
AMBA, explorando tendencias en la planificación. In
XXXIV Encuentro Arquisur 2015 y XIX Congreso de
Escuelas y Facultades Públicas de Arquitectura de los
países de América del Sur (La Plata, Argentina).
Arreguín Cortés, F., López Pérez, M., Marengo
Mogollón, H., & Tejeda González, C. (2007). Agua
virtual en México.
Bartorila, M. Á., & Loredo-Cansino, R. (2021). Cultural
heritage and natural component. From reassessment
to regeneration. ANUARI d’Arquitectura i Societat,
1(1), 286–311. https://doi.org/10.4995/anuari.2021.16
155
Boos, M. (2018). Image Segmentation using Convolutional
Neural Networks for Change Detection of Landcover
[Doctoral dissertation, HSR Hochschule für Technik
Rapperswil].
Borba, P., de Carvalho Diniz, F., da Silva, N. C., & de
Souza Bias, E. (2021). Building Footprint Extraction
Using Deep Learning Semantic Segmentation
Techniques: Experiments and Results. In 2021 IEEE
International Geoscience and Remote Sensing
Symposium IGARSS (pp. 4708–4711). IEEE. https://do
i.org/10.1109/igarss47720.2021.9553855
Chairez Araiza, C. (2005). El impacto de la regulación de
los ríos en la recarga a los acuíferos: El caso del
acuífero principal de la Comarca de La Laguna.
CONAGUA. (2018). Estadísticas del Agua en México.
Cruz, A., & Levine, G. (1998). El uso de las aguas
subterráneas en el distrito de riego 017, Región
Lagunera, México (p. 31). Instituto Internacional del
Manejo del Agua.
Dematteis, G. (2004). en el libro: Ramos, Á. M. (2005). Lo
urbano en 20 autores contemporáneos (Vol. 7).
Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya. Iniciativa
Digital Politecnica.
Domínguez Serrano, J. (2013). Agua y territorio: derechos
de los ciudadanos y organización administrativa.
Instituto Mexicano de Tecnología del Agua.
Dourojeanni, A., Jouravlev, A., & Chávez, G. (2002).
Gestión del agua a nivel de cuencas: teoría y práctica.
Cepal.
Duque, S. C., & Echeverry, P. G. (2015). Cuencas
hidrográficas de los ríos Otún y Consota: Ejes
estructuradores para la planeación y el desarrollo de
Pereira. Revista Gestión y Región, 15, 105–122.
Eizaguirre i Garaitagoitia, X. (1990). Los componentes
formales del territorio rural: los modelos de estructuras
agrarias en el espacio metropolitano de Barcelona: la
masía como modelo de colonización en Torelló.
Eizaguirre, X. (2019). El territorio como arquitectura.
Llibre, Laboratori d’Urbanisme de Barcelona (UPC).
Escudé, V. E. (2010). Aguas y urbanismo. Análisis de las
tensiones competenciales derivadas del proceso de
descentralización territorial.

FAO. (2011). The state of the world’s land and water
resources for food and agriculture – Managing systems
at risk.
Gede, M., Árcai, V., Vassányi, G., Supka, Z., Szabó, E.,
Bordács, A., Varga, C. G., & Irás, K. (2020). Automatic
vectorisation of old maps using qgis-tools,
possibilities and challenges. In Automatic
Vectorisation of Historical Maps Conference:
International workshop organised by the ICA
Commission on Cartographic Heritage into the Digital
(Vol. 13, pp. 37–44). https://doi.org/10.21862/avhm20
20.04
Gómez, O. C., Quintanilla, O. F., Dávalos, A. G.,
Restrepo, J. I. M., Farreras, J. M., & Andavert, D. V.
(2011). Moravia como ejemplo de transformación de
áreas urbanas degradadas: tecnologías apropiadas
para la restauración integral de cuencas
hidrográficas. Nova, 9(15), 41–52. https://doi.org/10.2
2490/24629448.488
Hernández-Tapia, G. M. (2017). Ríos urbanos. Análisis de
la relación entre el desarrollo urbano y la pérdida de los
ecosistemas fluviales.
INEGI. (2015a). Cartografía Catastral Diagnostico
Nacional.
INEGI. (2015b). Perfil del catastro municipal. Perfil del
catastro en México.
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., & Hinton, G. (2015). Deep
learning. Nature, 521(7553), 436–444. https://doi.org/
10.1038/nature14539
Leopold, L. B. (1968). Hydrology for urban land planning:
A guidebook on the hydrologic effects of urban land use
(Vol. 554). US Geological Survey. https://doi.org/10.31
33/cir554
Li, W., He, C., Fang, J., Zheng, J., Fu, H., & Yu, L. (2019).
Semantic segmentation-based building footprint
extraction using very high-resolution satellite images
and multi-source GIS data. Remote Sensing, 11(4),
403. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs11040403
McCarthy, J. (2004). What is artificial intelligence.
Pallarés Serrano, A. (2007). La planificación hidrológica
de cuenca como instrumento de ordenación ambiental
sobre el territorio.
Raffa, A. (2022). Euro-Med abandoned small(er) towns.
A landscape/ecological urbanism perspective for
sustainable regeneration in Basilicata inlands.
ANUARI d’Arquitectura i Societat, 2(2), 30–51. http
s://doi.org/10.4995/anuari.2022.18151
Rotger, D. (2019). Gestión de cuencas metropolitanas.
Un abordaje desde el proyecto de paisaje. Caso:
Arroyo del Gato, Región Metropolitana de Buenos
Aires. Urbe. Revista Brasileira de Gestão Urbana, 11. ht
tps://doi.org/10.1590/2175-3369.011.e20180036
Sarle, W. S. (1994). Neural networks and statistical
models.
Schjetnan, M. (2020). Landscape design and agriculture:
A Mexican perspective. In The Culture of Cultivation
(pp. 48–63). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780
429340895-4

archiDOCT

8

Urban Restructuring of Agricultural Productive Models in Hydrographic Basins Under Water stress. the Cas…

Solà-Morales, M. (1973). Las formas de crecimiento
urbano. Escola Tècnica Superior d’Arquitectura de
Barcelona.
Solà-Morales, Manuel. (1989). The culture of
description. Perspecta, 25, 16–25. https://doi.org/10.2
307/1567136
Suárez López, J. J., Puertas, J., Anta, J., Jácome, A., &
Álvarez-Campana, J. M. (2014). Gestión integrada de
los recursos hídricos en el sistema agua urbana:
Desarrollo Urbano Sensible al Agua como enfoque
estratégico. Ingeniería del agua, 18(1), 111–123.

Vian, F. D., Izquierdo, J. J. P., & Martínez, M. S. (2020).
¿Qué es un río urbano? Propuesta metodológica para su
delimitación en España. ACE: Arquitectura, Ciudad y
Entorno.
Wang, P., Chen, P., Yuan, Y., Liu, D., Huang, Z., Hou, X.,
& Cottrell, G. (2018). Understanding convolution for
semantic segmentation. In 2018 IEEE winter
conference on applications of computer vision (WACV)
(pp. 1451–1460). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/wac
v.2018.00163

archiDOCT

9

